Decent color quality, inexpensive, and printer cartridges are easy to find.
Excellent display and sound, good range of features
Prints fast and quietly and never fails
bad reception
screen, games, camera, speakerphone, mp3 ringtones
Feed Me Batteries if you use the LCD
Great photo quality. Easy to use point amp;shoot with nice zoom. Webcam
photo reproduction
Cons: see  amp;#147;a few concerns amp;#148; below amp;#13; amp;#10; amp;#13; amp;#10;
Poor battery life, huge size, poor features
Poor sound quality   software
The extensive array of dials and buttons can be confusing; image quality isn't top dog
A little bigger than what most people would be into, but no big deal.
No removable media, No flash, Low resolutions
Sleek, conveniently combines several devices into one, compact
small, light, good resolution, well priced
Didn't come with a printer cable
It came with softwear
Uses batteries at a good rate, use rechargeables
None
ink cartridges are expensive and hard to find at online etailers
harder to find the ink at stores
Not the highest quality.
sturdy, separate ink, photo quality, multi-connect
takes great photos
Style, Functionality, Quality, Voice Recognition Dialing
Great quality prints.
easy
some static and dropped calls, small distance between microphone and receiver.
Poorly designed lens cover, no manual settings
Excellent image quality and ease of use
Super Photos, long battery life
Small, easy to read, text messaging, great silent mode, usually static free
economical, good close ups
quality images, good design, simple
Speed
None that I can think of for the price
None yet
Cheap, Easy to use, quite Pretty in shape
Vision is overhyped, slow, unstable,  significant browser errors
Needs a pointable sun umbrella
Price, Ease of use,
Fast, quality pictures, great color and ease of use
weight
Extensive manual control, high image quality, excellent suite of pro/advanced features, articulated LCD screen.
Reliability is horrendous
Easy to use, Idiot Proof, and a great deal!
Pixelated video; low battery endurance. Some may be turned off by color scheme.
No need to carry 2 items (PDA   phone); wireless web that is useful
Unreliable   unintuitive.
Low price, large color prints, up to 11 x 17!
Ease of use, works with many prepaid services, low price.
Size and Weight #13; #10;Features, and NO ANTENNA!
Cost, resolution
Lots of Features, easy to use, great way to keep in touch
can't think of any
Disk Storage  amp;amp; Ease Of Use
Cool design, IR port, solid address book UI, and long standard battery life.
Different choice of covers
Sometimes joystick can be a hassle, internal antenna, poor GSM reception all over!
User Friendly!
great quality, low cost
uses AA batteries, has flimsy pop-up flash
No sound w/video, instruction book intimidating, zoom and focus slow
Price; has a much better lens than disposable cameras or cheap 35mm cameras.
Excellent color output, easy to use, solid color technology
No AC power supply, 8MB CF (you will NEED more space) small LCD screen.
Light, easy to use, Floppies
Display hard to read, ringer and speaker not as loud, slow response in menus
great quality, amazing detail
Killer prints especially on Photo Paper
none
none
Fast and crisp color
Easy to carry, versatile, shot review/delete, 2.3 Megapixels
Nice looking, good features
Batteries, doesn't come with a case
Excellent picture quality, lots of features
Expensive cartridges, replaced too often
When it is working, it is spectacular.
Warning may cause marital strife.
faulty sensor extremely slow photo printing too loud vibrates too much   printer driver problems
possibly the large size, the model has been disconinued
It eats batteries like there's no tomorrow.
Sprint Service
Cartridges replacement are very expensive. Occasional paper jam.
No external antenna, good key size, lots of useful features
Very lightweight and compact, comfortable, turns easily even when heavy.
I do not like the power saver mode
Very fast black  amp; white as well as color copies, very easy to use
All in one phone. No need for a pda and a phone.
Couldn't find one ,unless you feel that paying less for more is a con.
To maximize use need to purchase additional flashcards and a reader
A bit bulky.  I really can't think of much else!
Size, display, easy controls
EVERYTHING!
Battery life; voice clarity; volume
Prints photos as if they were taken to a photo developer...
None
Zoom Capability,20mb card,recharging batteries,great reprints on Epson printer.
the reception in buildings
Price, good software package, easy-to-use features, good quality photos
it is simple to use
easy to use, cheap media
Picture Quality, features, USB connectivity, included accessories
Brilliant Design, clear and sharp screen, MPEG4 playback, Quad band support, Bluetooth
hidden additional costs; lacking standard, practical features
Jams with specialty paper; uses ink quickly; just average for text
Blurry low-light images, weak LCD, shadowing
None
none
Travel system, comfy, rides nice
Stylish, Small, changeable cases
Keypad, voice quality, signal quality, proprietary headset connector, no Bluetooth
none
goes through ink quickly and is very loud
It's easy to use even for children.
Need to watch outdoor use,read instructions
Hard to find ink
Have to buy a longer-lasting battery than the one included
Not the most stylish looking printer, paper input tray weak. amp;#13; amp;#10;
none
Inexpensive initially
The camera broke after six months.
No notification that lens cap is still on
small, sleek, excellent picture and color quality, inexpensive
Warm up time
Excellent phone with great reception and ergonomics and simple to use.
poor quality pictures, bad memory
ring tones, not highly atractive.  #13; #10;
Small and pretty easy to use.  Extras not found on cheap cameras.
No offered by all plans
EVERYTHING ELSE!!!  Battery life, reception, keypad, ringers, gets very hot...you name it, it's bad!
Slim, good reception, Decent Camera, cool looking
could use optical zoom
Purple does not print well.
Lens cover/spring works funny
Clam-shell design, good sound, good reception, good battery life
Good Picture Quality, Zoom, Video cable for TV slide viewing.
Price, ease of use, only uses two batteries
fast, easy, don't have to wait for developing
price, 8 MB CF card, no AC included adapter, weak flash, ISO 100 exposure only
Not for  amp;quot;heavy duty amp;quot; (uless you buy two or three)
speed, color graduations, picture resolution, sharpness of print
Easy to Use, Good Battery, Good Reception
Expensive, needs a fast PC
size, design, functions, compatibility
Contacts, Calendar, Reliability, Volume Control   Clarity
Weird looking!
Bulky
Wish the zoom was greater
Low resolution
not a real wide color or pattern variety
great quality, low, low, low initial price.
Light, small, easy. Good quality photos
COLOR SCREEN! Unconventional and cool flip style.  Versatility. PCS Vision enabled. Speakerphone.
Nice features set, support microdrive, user friendly
have to keep it really steady
HP software leaves a lot to be desired.
Fast and very good color and b/w printouts, simple to use, $$ friendly
Small, beautiful, customizable phone. Has the most features of any phone in the US!
Easy to use for beginners, inexpensive
Too simple, kinda slow focusing, NO Advanced functions.
Good design, small, voice dial, getting cheaper and cheaper
Poor image quality
Quality Problems
solid built, good phonebook, sleek, nice reception, scheduler.
Comfortable, affordable, durable  compact for travel
For the size and price?  None.
Lackluster mediocrity, poorly thought through design.
Sometimes more than one sheet of paper is pulled through at a time
does not have zoom
Small, efficient, easy to use
Picture Quality and Poor Battery Life
toddler not restrained enough
none
Cheap
compact size, hidden antennae, games, calendar and calculator,
Size, quality, uses standard Compact Flash
small memory
VERY high on the "cool!" scale; combo PDA actually works; constructed well.
No frills.  No camera, bluetooth, mp3, speakerphone.
fast, highest resolution printer available, only 180 dollars, supports thicker-than-normal paper
Expensive and still quite cumbersome
Features, size, display and data connectivity.
Quick Printing, Easy Set up, Great on screen help
handles 11x17 paper
Batterylife,dock sold separately
Smart Card reader feature
Dual display, good looks, sharp screen, easy to use menus, polyphonic ringer
Easy to use, comes with all accessories to get started, high quality pictures.
Zoom could be better
Color Copying quality and options amp;#13; amp;#10;Color Printing quality amp;#13; amp;#10;
Nice pictures, nice looking camera
very good pictures
Easy to Use
Ink always clogs and runs out very fast.
Highest resolution I could find for the price!  Real glass lens!
ease of use; good pix
Not the best
Light weight, good reception, nice looking, easy to use.
Light, good-looking, games, and web-ready
Large when folded, takes up over a third of my trunk space (mid-size auto).
Great Camera for the Price
I can't really think of anything wrong
No support for anything but windows 9x
Only if ink were cheaper (all ink)
Large Screen Size, Monochromatic Screen, NO downloadable ringtones
Bad piece of equipment
Good reception, perfect for a general user. Includes voicemail.
a very handy piece
Colored screen. Lots of fancy stuff like wallpaper, etc.
Very great quality, speed correct.
None really.
Great Photos and two side printing
not without limitations, settings are lost when batteries are changed
It is not a good phone.
viewfinder could be a little clearer,no ISO settings
Occasionally Slow; Volume Dosen't Get Very Loud
Individual Ink Cartridges
LCD screen can't be used in daylight.
Weighty for its size
CF Type I/II slot, timer, continuous shooting.
Silvery futuristic exterior flakes by just looking at it the wrong way.
Lots of features, easy to use
You get what you paid for....
Don't consider this for high-quality printable images.
price (will soon be obsolete), optical viewfinder, durability and quality
Does not work properly-a complete money pit.
light, cool-looking,  camera, internet access, speaker, calendar, alarm, text/pic messages, GPS
One of their better phones, smaller with camera feature.
Standard memory is low, full documentation only on CD-ROM
Long battery life, light, easy to use, free after rebate.
quick shot, port capabilities, really easy to use, deleteable images
Nice and compact
Speakerphone volume and battery life
Inexpensive.  Easy to use. Prints well.
LCD Display drains out the battery.
speakerphone, loud ringer, multiple phone numbers for each contact
None.
This a very compact phone that fits your face beautifully.  Great features.
Slow to warm up, large size, printing a color photo is slow.
Light, Well Equipped, Good-Looking, Reliable, Superior Battery, Good Signal
grainy photos
Really slick design, terrific display, bluetooth, no disabled features
If durability is high on your list than this phone should not be.
Good Print Quality, Good Price, Amazing Service
Expensive and can get a bit complicated if you are fairly new shooter.
Not as many manual options or bells+whistles as others
Clarity and speed is top notch.
Not compatible with Windows ME
Screen, Appearance, Battery Life, Quality, Ergonomics, Recption, Layout, Ease of Use
No external caller ID (this would make it perfect!)
awkward menu  navigation, small buttons, long antenna, little space for name  to do list
Compact, High-Quality Pics, USB Card Reader
Nothing major.
Flash Red-eye is a pain. I try never to use the flash. Low battery life
belt clip
Easy to use long battery life.
Can be costly to get the most out of it
attractive, external display, voice notes
none I can think of
Difficulty feeding photo paper. It will sometime grab multiple sheets
Software instability.
if you want quality goods you will have to fork over the dough, this item doesn't come cheap
Default resolution is high (but can be changed before snapping the picture)
Oversleeps...Full 45 seconds to print after first print command.
paper is finicky to load sometimes
Great image quality, great auto metering, one touch photos.
Excellent photo quality and to be able to record your own movies!
Requires some effort to upload photos to hard drive.
Expensive ink
Battery life
NOTHING THAT I CAN FIND THUS FAR
Takes time to learn functions and how to use camera.
Just don't forget to put down the paper tray
loud, slow, uses lots of ink, prints not 100% reliable both for texts or photos
Great reception and clear sound
Contains three services in one.
Unrealible, cartriges empty quickly, fairly slow printing
Lightweight, nice colors
none
The Sound quality is bar none.  #13; #10;The voice dial feature is great!
Slow, the controls are difficult to use. No success Mac or PC.
Extremely poor functional design. Overpriced, overhyped and developmentally challenged product of poor engineering.
Reception acceptable. Good for international. Battery good.
Low price for 3MegaPix camera.  Easy to use. Uses only 2 AA batteries.
Light weight with the comfort of the full-size stroller
buttons fragile, short battery life, no extras, accessories hard to find
Compact, value, resolution
Nice size, Good quality photos, Solid build, Good quality video
Slow to pull up pictures that have already been taken
True photo quality, edge to edge printing + more
PRICE, Memory, Bundle
Great LCD, 3x zoom, comact, lightweight, and durable
Lightweight, compact umbrella folding, easy to maneuver,
not the best quality  sucks battery power
no dc input, usb connection only, no picture effects
Batteries and Zoom
cheap
Compact size makes it perfect travel camera.
LENS CAP!, Lack of a zoom feature, Propriety USB connection
Easy to use
size, price
clear signal. Nice battery life. Small
none
sometimes does not ring or vibrate when text message
Beautiful color quality
Big, Noisey  amp; Ink Thirsty
easy to use,
Feature-rich, long battery life, strong reception, usable, durable
Pricey. Battery Life is weak.
Voice recorder, navigation, screen quality, speakerphone
Poor longevity.
Inconvenient headphone/handsfree jack, Price!!
need more professional picture management
Color screen, small size, "cool factor," features, etc...
Expensive media, basic features, poor power supply
Easy to use, good reception, drop in charging, vibrate
Slow LCD frame rate in some conditions.
Slim Design, great volume
Great Color
Big frame, sometimes really slow between pictures.
size, durable
Amazing signal strength, Nice LCD and easy BT pairing.
Beautiful looks.  Sturdy.  Good battery life.  Gadgets and gizmos.  Loud speakerphone.
No flash.
Pricey toy, Not meant for fast repetitive shooting, lighting stinks
Cheap currently selling for $99
$300 price tag is just too much
USB, Picture Quality, ease of use, Software Bundle
frequent battery recharge, no storage case, small chassis for large hands
Smallest available, great function
bulky
Limit on songs in iTunes, voice recognition could use improvement.
The speed could be a little better
Screen useless in the sunlight. Poor menu navigation.  can't remove busy background pictures.
reliable, except for the proprietary charging plug
Heart-stopping price if bought without service
-lightweight/compact; very easy to use;excellent photo results
trying to answer messages can be difficult.
Cartridge Price; Paper Handling
great zoom, great price, easy to use, 3X optical zoom, good marco pics
Hesitates when taking a photo, zoom in takes out detail.
none found
size of screen for the farsighted
Generally easy to use; great pictures
Only 4 MB CF card included, eats through batteries like there's no tomorrow
16 MB Memory Stick is not enough., , Photo software package sucks., , No carrying case!
Very Expensive, a little large, basket access difficult
convenience, ease of use, price, fun
Great phone voice quality, Very good MP3 player, Excellent camera, Large memory capability.
No roaming information, great tunes don't go in alarm clock
Slow printing on low resolution or text output, which I don't care about.
The next generation in convergent audio technology
3.2MP resolution, USB, crystal clear pictures, compact, rechargeable battery, Self-Timer, movie mode for $250
Games,design,NO ANTENNA!,color screen
Complicated print options; ink lifetime; driver conflicts
Eats batteries, no optical zoom
decent print quality came with my pc for free easy to use
Feature Rich, Great Looking Hardware, Zoom, Picture quality
not cheap if you have to buy it over and over again
Tiny little canopy.
Fits through doors, lightweight, easy to fold
Incredibly bad decisions on movie file format.  Poor software
LOUD, bulky
Fast B/W, Cheap
Words printed are easy to read. amp;#13; amp;#10;Prints at high speed
Cheap
small, easy to use, many advanced features, accepts ibm microdrive
Color screen resolution, easy to navigate, loud ringer, mobile internet capability, free second battery
slow, not recommended for bulk printing jobs or high end work
Extremely poor software, difficult to abort print jobs.
I just bought it on Friday and I can't download.
Eats batteries, no zoom, poor resolution, slow uploads
Small, easy to operate, good service
powerful antennae, easy to use, compose ring tones
Multi Function Center Button
everything
VERY Nice printer/scanner
Flip top easily broken; ringer stops working occasionally; horrible warranty program
Mediocre camera quality, small keypad buttons
big noisy ink guzzler :(
Scanning, Faxing, Cartridges
dismal battery life, awkward keypad, user interface
Size and weight won't satisfy the pickiest of cell phone consumers
Good sound through the handset
This printer is easy to install and prints clear script or pictures!
Ease of use, quality of picture, price.
Display Window not lighted.
quality finish and solidly built, attractive large interface, Battery lasts loooong time
Low cost, easy set up
Great Quality and Fair Price
takes a few moments to change ink cartridges
Have to buy the better battery and memory card
easy and small
Quality Point and shoot, Olympus lens, Tiff and panorama features
poor durability, not a world phone
Great affordable camera
slow
Printing Envelopes
Printer causing BSOD with Win98!
Beautiful color display, many ringtones, very customizable
Great compact phone, lots of life in it.
beautiful images!
Fades and falls apart
Excellent text printing, longlasting toner, no paper jams ever, small footprint, separate envelope feeder
None yet.
Expensive ink, eats ink up quickly too
Manual was on CD so I didn't find it for a long time.
Taking pictures in low light situations
Expensive Ink cartridges.
Lots of features in a relatively compact package
Does everything well.
A discontinued model with Verizon.  Got mine at Radio Shack. NLA at Verizon.
Talk time is decreased (possibly to the new style battery)
arrow keys can be hard to use
Battery recharges directly on camera.
Big, bulky, and heavy.
Low volume, bad pic   screen resolution, not very reliable.
small, light, cute
Nice and small, solidly built, fast, clear and convenient. Great beginner!
Need to buy a car seat after 20lbs.
Some common functions hard to access
all-in-one
Easy to read display, lots of interesting features,
Manual mode, user-selectable ISO, movie mode  amp;#13; amp;#10;
Generally slow operation
none yet.
Fast, color, prints an array  of things
POOR MANUFACTUER SUPPORT/WARRANTY, Poor battery life, Can't use bluetooth headset for MP3 playback
For the money, as well as a single footprint, it can't be beat.
Scratches easily, Web browser
Allows floppy disk usage
Easy to use, Internet, Email, SMS and VERY Customizable
Great image quality, easy to use
pictures can be grainy and dark, need to download photos often
Excellent color, small and compact, batteries/charger included
standard flash-sync port and complete manual controls!
Only stroller that fits in ALL overhead bins; very light amp;#9; amp;#9;
easy to use; good price; great pictures; good software; LCD viewfinder
Picks up background noise, locks up, reception in fringe areas (with original firmware)
Cons
Super cheap, and it functions.  Great for kids.
quick and easy
PC-Compatible Disks, Easy-To-Use, Battery Life, Special Features  amp;#13; amp;#10; amp;#13; amp;#10; amp;#13; amp;#10; amp;#13; amp;#10;
Size, weight, portability, clarity, overall appearance
A 4-Megapixel Camera at a low price!
Good signal, lightweight
Great pictures.
High quality, compact size, easy to maintain
Dropped calls, delayed answering, calls not going through the first time.
Metallic blue color is appealing.
Small, easy to use, clarity, cool settings
limited photo resolution, lens placement
Excellent sound quality, long standby and talk time, light weight, works on digital and analog
Look, fun to use, easy to learn, okay quality pictures
slow, bad color reproduction
.
none that I know of.
Very poor reception, drops calls all the time!
many
Good price, Good pictures, Nice Size.
software reliability, price
N/A
Poor Quality on Photos, Slow
Great quality, quite, fast, reliable
Camedia software not all it could be.
All in one design saves space, power and money
No Analog, Shuts down once in while, software not upgradable
Strange noises worry me.
Horrible accessory charger, noisy bootup/shutdown
Wasted Ink, Jammed Paper
Can't think of any.
It was free from VoiceStream as long as I signed a 1 year contract.
Awkward to hold, limited photo space
Requires a gray market upgrade not supported by AT T
Cheap; doesn't jam
Small memory cards
weak ringtone , poor handfree   keypad   radio
Excellent size, good integration, stable
Focus problems and inconsistent quality of shots.
Low price.  Convenient size and shape.
cheap, good print quality on special papers
Fast, Network Ready, Great Colors
easy to use, compact, light weight
When not using flash, shutter speed's too slow.
Excellent print quality amp;#13; amp;#10;Ease of use
No Zoom, Software Stinks, Picture Transfer is S-L-O-W
good quality and speed for the price
computer software, battery life
Because it provides so much, it's not for the casual cell phone user.
Clear print -- but only for a few short jobs. That's it.
Fast printing, crisp colors
Small, easy to use.
Great camera
Some would consider it a con that you must have  quot;great quot; credit to be able to get the Nextel service.
It's pretty.
Crashes (but saves data)
I have had problems with devices that attach to the charge/data port.
Price, weak flash, limited resolution choices
The price is right, it takes a lot of pictures as well as video.
ink price
none so far.
Small package delivers great performance
Great ride, reversible handle, good storage space, front and rear wheels lock, etc.
I would not recommend to buy this mobile.
Great ease of use with the walk up fax and as a copy machine.Fast scanning.
not a GSM phone (world phone), can't have more than one phone number per contact
Its connections
Images are far from top of the line; clunky shape.
Expensive, heavy, doesn't steer well, harness gets stuck, amp;#13; amp;#10;wheels too small, it's a tank
High priced, no built in games, a Nokia has more features
Reception, battery life
perfect shots, long-focus, easy to use, a lot of features, good software
Quick printing, great color prints -  photo quality, economical
great for people who want to fix their BAD pictures!!
speaker-phone, well-designed
small size, clear pitcures, Olympus name
1/60 second shutter speed  too fast for low light conditions.
Great design, easy to use
excellent print quality
Lack of features found on other phones, battery life dwindles after a while.
Not piles of memory, battery eater.
most wanted features at an affordable price.
Print speed could be better
Excellent Photos!
Can't match the power of today's DeskJet printers
Fast. Great print quality!
All-in-one, Price
Low price.  Solid product.
Incredible Detail, Light, Nice Accessories, Ease of Use
future inkjet costs (so is any other inkjet printer)
Outstanding image quality, great options, fantastic price/quality ratio
Limited use in dark conditions. No memory expansion.
short battery life, fragile to carry around
prints fairly fast, cartridges easily changed
Good phone, very compact
Inexpensive, free you buy a packaged deal with a Compaq computer, dual cartridge system.
I love everything about it except I wish I could download real songs not midis.
Great quality,low cost,fast printing
Great color screen, and speaker phone.
speed, photorealistic quality, price, low running cost, fabulous looks
USB or Parallel connections, good print quality
Price, Output, Value. All rolled into one!
Not enough ringer options, vibrating ringer a little weak, archaic phone book setup.
sturdiness, comfort, easy to push, beautiful exterior
Great multifunction capability, media slots, great prints
Overall sound quality, durability, size, battery life, features, quality, price
Integrated Palm OS, user interface, battery life
Battery Life is so so, Size of supplied flash card.
Comes w/only 8MB flash, some photos blurred
Multiple Sending at the same time has problems
solid construction, versatile, great reception and clarity, comprehensive manual
Un-reliable, too slow, doesn't work half the time
Great Camera for $900-$1200 range
Annoying ring tones, which are often too loud. Can not feel vibrating in pocket.
pretty clear printing... when it does
low price for digital
Picture quality, features and price
Weak battery, low battery warning indicator.
pricey ink refills, tabloid sheets are manual feed.
Speed, Price, USB and Parallel Compatibility, Print Quality
Small, lightweight, easy to use, ringtones, AOL instant messenger, blue light
excellent color and black print quality, compact, moderately priced
High End functions and glass lenses at good prices.
$99 price tag for a printer that has comes highly recommended.
Lots of great features, audio and video options along with storage are great.
Free
sound quality, no customizable ring tone
Color display, polyphonic ringtones
It's excellent all the way around......when it's working properly.
Size, traditional camera shape, battery life, manual features
Batteries are expensive, you have to buy the AC adapter for $150 if you want one
Built-in flash has limited capabilities.  amp;#13; amp;#10;1.8 inch LCD display makes viewing images somewhat difficult.
EASY fold, easy to drive and much more!
Small, Quality pictures, rechargeable Li-ion battery, great LCD
Screen could use a bit of help, Palm/Phone integration not 100% yet
Sturdy,Navigation,Compact,Design and Function
Easy to operate/makes great pictures
Toner smudge/streak
Everything
complex menu system.  LCD hard to read in bright light
Easy to use, well designed, cheap
Saves to floppy; good for those with older computers who don't have USB connections.
Awful drivers, endless network headaches
Reliability, usefulness, customer support.
No Color Screen, Big.
Hard to locate subject in low light conditions
Long loading time, vibrate option is iffy.
none at this time
Easy to loose!!!
It sucks battery power like a vampire sucks blood.
The printer has problems with the right ink cartridge.
8 meg memory card, no video/audio recording
Costly power adapter!
Weight, Sony Warranty
2 For 1
So compact and stylish appearance
fair reception, earpiece speaker, $expen$ive, Sprint only
Does it all, fast, quality output, easy to use
Easy to use
none yet
high resolution, ease of use
minor inconveniences found in almost any stroller
sturdy construction
prefer a covered keypad.
Somewhat pricey, may measure signal strength inaccurately
Price
Easy to use, dependable, inexpensive
Price; printed documentation; printhead locking lever; rear manual feed tray.
external blue light turns on for no reason
Noisy paper feed and expensive ink cartridges.
no cons
WAP browser, size, weight, features, battery life
heavy, large, expensive
removing ear-piece from handset is hard.
Big Beautiful Prints. Super Speedy. Six Ink Tanks. Replaceable Print Head. Up to 13x19 prints.
Does not print photos very well
Scanner, Color Ink-jet printer, Fax, and Photo center all in one!
Poor interface design, short battery life.
poor battery life and difficult user interface
Battery life not as great as expected.
small sleek phone
cheap, poor quality, messy
cheap, also works in Linux, currently easy to find
No Borderless prints!
2 mega pixel quality, good zoom lens, ease of use.
Can you say  amp;quot;Paper Jams amp;quot;
Nice clean print.
Takes great pictures
LCD screen drains batteries
Lack of durability of case finish
Battery life is average at best for cell phones, but better than my old SPH-A460.
Ease of use, photo quality, don't need a computer
NONE (I will let you know if any come up)
So tiny and portable.  Easy.  Durable.   Makes short movies.  Quality seems better than 2 Megapixel.
sleek, durable battery, pretty
Excellent color and graphics quality WHEN NEW.
This phone is so technologically advanced, that everything on it is a Pro!
Best Value Color Phone, Real Song Ringer, Highly Customizable
ease of use
last years model, more memory cards needed
Reliable, perfect size, all around great phone
User friendly, many features like the 8260 series phone
Battery Life
Easy to use and setup, decent quality, reliable
Cost, Ease of Use, Picture Quality
no low ink light, jams occasionally
expensive
Look for good price breaks for deals to lower cost
accu-feed paper handling to eliminate jams
not a great camera, not a whole lot of features.
Less features than competition, Up-close image quality concerns, Different aspect ratios in support resolutions
small, light, fast shutter speed, internal 16 megs. memory with option of smartmedia disks.
Perfect screen, great ringers, attractive look, small, easy to use, MANY GREAT AND USEFUL OPTIONS.
Call Quality, Earpiece and Handfree volume, Picture Camera, Robust Contacts Application, Built-in Camera
With this feature set and at this price point, none that are significant,
compact, light, optical  amp; digital zoom, expandable, crisp 2" LCD
Small, lots of features, great reception.
This printer is the worst printer I've ever bought!!!!!!
expensive
Clear display. Easy to use menus.  , The 2.0 Megapixel images are good quality
Great photo quality, affordable price, not a space-hog.
Weight, Size
none really....the color variety is a little odd, but I still love it
Highly priced and slow. Built-in flash.
Serial connection (buy a USB card reader), soft at infinity
Super small, bright LCD display, 2.0 megapixels, flash, solid construction,
Small, features, price, ok reception
Plain exterior
Better than the V710 but still not perfrect.
Battery Life, Durability, Phone book (the way it stores entries), Display light, sound clarity
Small size #13; #10;Many features
Best cell phone on the Market
Easy to use, excellent pictures, online services like ofoto.com make this even better
Looks cool-
Automatic focus and exposure, solid design
Ink is expensive and this is an ink eater!
Great looking pictures up to 8X10
Inexpensive, uses cheap toner, trouble free.
good value....nice feel....versatile
Color faceplates, ring features, good size
Portable, inexpensive.  Easy to use.
Beautiful display, small form factor, solid construction
HEAVY ink user, no cable, expensive to operate
Great Print Quality, Fast, Quiet
power hungry, small LCD
Horrible company, horrible network.
Bundled storage card is too insubstantial. No voice with Movie recording. Manual lacks quality content.
No voice recorder, data transfer?
great picture quality, excellent video w/sound, good battery life, durable
No viewfinder, Comes with only a 4MB memory stick
slimmest 2MP camera in the world, minimal shutter lag, output excellent for Web
lousy menus, horrible keys, overpriced, crappy camera. annoying beeps no battery life
Hyper-sensitive microphone. Occasional re-dials required.
best pic quality in this class--no doubt!
NONE
Excellent combination of phone/PDA functionality
Battery life
Not so good in low light, may be bulky for smaller hands
no optical zoom
none
built in camera, external color display, cool factor.
Nice screen
Reception, Contact List, Tri-Mode
a little bulky
no floppy flash disk
Small size, clear reception, so easy to use-my technology impaired dad can operate it.
Can't Think Of Any
Easy to use, good quality photos, plug and play software
Slow download - no macrofocus
Picture quality, storage, easy of use, small size, great value
Limited storage capacity
Can't think of any
None
battery life, ability to enter multiple numbers for one person, durability, display
none
Pricey, Phone gets warm quick, Buttons are very small, Defective Display
Optical Viewfinder can be dark in low light, no automatic lens cover.
Your number shows up as private when you call someone, until you change that.
name it. "reception", battery, silly menus, fragility, speaker, etc...
ink refills cost more than Canon, but last lots longer
didn't keep it long enough to find out
vibrate, voice name dialing
There are not cons that I can mention!
Great print quality, fast printing, 2880 dpi printing, reasonable price.
Can not get to many pictures on one floppy.
outdated (already)
Small, sleek, light; just my titanium girl style. And packed with features too!
doesn't print in color but I don't use color
Power button location.
Screen could be brighter, holster clip could be easier to use, battery life
price
LCD Display is weak at best, menu navigation is poorly designed, Volume.
Expensive, basic features
big bright screen, megapixel camera, camcorder, MP3 player, voice command
Size, T9 text
Poor printing quality
Ease of use, ability to print on the spot, Olympus digital "greatness" behind this camera
light, portable
The location of the voice record button makes it easy to accidentally hit.
sturdy, dependable, reliable, clear
Cute, cheap, anybody could use it
Attractive appearance
too expensive for a toy
Battery life, speakerphone, camera lens cover, and the ease to customize the phone
Batteries don't last long, Time in between picture shots.
Simple to use
Lens barrel visible through optical viewfinder.
keys and display, battery life, menu learning curve, can be pricey.
A little easy to lose grip of, not enough " memory space",too thick.
No recurring alarm, not that well supported in the US (yet), no bluetooth, not cheap
LOCKS UP!  NO BATTERY LIFE!  Metallic sounding voices.
Poor zoom picture quality
does not come with the USB cable for installation, must be bought separately
Rugged, dependable, 2-Way Text Messaging as well as voice, good value
Color output and clarity coupled with speed and silence
Unreliable voice-mail alert
What good are gadgets if you can't keep a call connected?
Battery life and Reception is terrible;Phone overheats like crazy;Lousy ring-tones
Extensive manual control option, good photo quality
Great prints for the money, reliable, easy installation
Beginners beware! Menus confusing compared to other brands. Shutter lag.
Good Quality
Crisp picture, prints premium quality 5x7's and smaller
charger stand, manual, navigation buttons,
none
Unlocked Version is Quirky and Unfriendly
Kind of boring
No rechargeables, only? 2.8x zoom
zoom lens
Produces heat during lengthly calls, buttons
Very inexpensive - easy to use
Long set up time, complicated directions, not Windows compliant; cable not included.
Zoom is not that great
The Software on this camera just plain SUCKS!
Menu interface could be easier to use
everything in one kit; easy to use; decent photo quality for inexpensive camera
Prints fast text documents, Quality photos.
Looks cool, great sound quality, nice menu system.
Drops calls.  Reception is horrible.  Must pay to do ANYTHING on this phone and service.
great quality, fast, quiet, inexpensive
Small and affordable
only room for one cartridge at a time
Small size, attractive design, lightweight
Reception indicator seems flakey, bad contact list setup.
Durability, Battery Life
small
BIG PROBLEM WITH THE FLIP HINGES ITS BREAKS EASILY.
Nice design, relatively small, loud ring alerts, speakerphone.
Reception rocks, easy interface, speakerphone, reception, clairity is good, did I mention reception?
Deleting bad shots takes too many steps
Exceptional Features. Light Weight. Ultra-cool blue screen.  Nice games.
No disc to download on and goes through batteries fast.
Great size and style.
640x480 is the highest resolution and 320x240 resolution is USELESS
They should have included a USB cable
External caller ID. That's about it.
Whatever...
Nice Looking
easy to use
Having to replace ink cartridges every three weeks gets to be quite costly.
Short zoom
the screen get dirty easy, but that is about it.
Ease of operation, excellent picture quality, value
Very beautiful stroller, bunting cover is a great accessory
Inexpensive
nothing
Everything from Style to Functionality
Small, light, sexy
Inconsistent results with flash, small memory stick included,controls difficult to make selections.
voice dialing has problems, bad reception in buildings, takes a while to start up
Wears out quickly, and difficult to clean
How could I possibly say anything good about this camera.  It never worked long enough.
Everything
great quality, floppy disk storage, manual/auto controls
Inconsistent picture quality
Excellent photo quality , very good printing quality , Low Price.
easy to use, hangs on belt clip nicely
BATTERY LIFE, A BIT LARGE
Easy to use and price is right
need coated, costly paper and high res for good quality printouts, noisy and slow
quality lens  amp; pictures, available accessories, multiple functions, memory cards, resolution selections. price.
Expensive, no holographic display, average battery-life, takes getting used to the small size.
Comfortable feel during use. Simple to use. Good volume and reception.
Discontinued model, but still available
Infrared is not builtin. Small Screen. Standby is 3 days only.  #13; #10;
floppy disk
Ease of use, quality of pictures
Everything!  The quality is amazing!
Easy to Use amp;#13; amp;#10; amp;#13; amp;#10;Great Software amp;#13; amp;#10; amp;#13; amp;#10;
Crisp text
Excellent printing capabilities, versatile, scanner, fax, copier, more?
Great quality prints, compact size, built in memory card reader
kind of slow, no on/off switch
well if it weren't a lemon... voice activation, display clarity, ringtone selection
Speed  amp; only supports USB.
easy to use, fold, wash and comfortable for child
Olympus name, nice size LCD, Plentiful options.
So So Battery Life, Where's the Rechargeable Battery?
Yikes is it noisy!
Easy to use, Ink Provided, A strong home printer
Easy, cheap (at first), reliable
Size, sound quality and clarity
you need bateries
Price, print quality
Noisy, paper jams
Compact and Sleek,Features
Poor  construction, poor sound to people called. Difficult to use.
solidly built, good battery life, good sound
EVERYTHING ELSE: Battery, echo, ease of use...
HAVE TO HOLD THE PHONE DIRECTLY OVER THE EAR TO HEAR WELL!
Poor OCR software, Ink Consumption
none
durablity, print quality
Large, bulky, crooked paper feed, flimsy output tray
the printing quality is very outstanding.  The colors appear true to original.
Lousy reception.
easy to lose
High quality high resolution pictures. Lots of features
Price, weight
Speaker phone not perfected yet.
Dingy color, poor navigation, slow software, sensitive microphone, etc
Switch needed to be replaced.
none as of yet
Great size, excellent feature set, easy to use
flimsy, cheap construction, not durable, cheap belt clip, poor battery life, prone to problems
flash too bright, no case, 8mb stick included, expensive
Paper feed isn't a tray
Eats batteries
Compact size, lots of programming options
Good starter camera, memory expansion, quality pictures, pricing, trusted name.
Good print quality for average home users, small footprint, affordable.
none its very reliable
Great Value, Compact, Asthetic, Fast, Simple.
Battery life
Can't really think of any.
Standard double A batteries, picture quality, ease of operation
no analog mode, weak vibration mode, plastic feel, disabled Bluetooth file transfers, weak camera
One of the lightest phones on the market today. Packed with features. including voice command.
Lacks some more advanced features, small memory card included, menu control button awkward to use
low light pics need manual setting,
great print quality, price
Gimme at Least a 16MB CF Card; Firmware Occasionally Buggy
Component failure, overwhelming menus, signal reception.
Inexpensive, great features, long battery life, and excellent quality photos.
good pictures, easy to use
Carl Zeiss Lens, many "pro" features, Great price, Night framing/Night Shooting, Extremely flexible,
Auto focus is somewhat slow, occasional long delays when pictures transferred to memory card
N80 body, USB,
Poor low-light focusing.  Body too small for larger hands.  Flimsey feeling battery door.
Unintuitive controls for detailed settings
Needs frequent headclean cycles
Poor quality camera and absolutely terrible quality control!
good phone
Waiting for it to be delivered
voice activation (calling, etc.)
takes great pictures
blurry,grainy,very poor quality
see above.
Ease of use. IBM microdrive support Instant gratification Capable of good quality pictures
compact, great pictures
Battery Life, Tends to blur moving subjects
size!, easy of use, cuteness
EASY TO USE, AND GOOD QUALITY PICTURES
The sunscreen isn't big enough to be effective and there's no hand brake.
Sweet Camera, Nice Features
Supplied software is awful, no Mac support
None
affordable, practical, ease of use, easy to customize
good quality pictures, low price
USB Communication with ME flaky - Tech Support Horrible
No USB/parallel cable
Color fax ability, scanner, copier
The SUV of strollers.  It will go through anything.
Crisp perfect pictures every time.
more stylish, lots of accessories, text messaging, customizable features
Cool looking, great color, nice features
Battery life, candy bar design,weak structure,camera blurry, limited memory, buttons hard, slow application
camera... only $30 w/ Sprint's special offer
Small, good quality pics
Lens cap not attached, minor design flaws. Not good for impromptu shots.
color reproduction
A little noisy.
Small, lightweight, easy to use
not good for fast candids
Quality and initial price. Easy to print banners.
Interface, Noisy while in high interference areas, Only 9 melody rings to choose from
Poor picture quality, very slow speed between pictures, quite large, no zoom
Lens Cap, Expensive Battery
high radiation emission
Tons of great features with stylish look to boot!
Tiny, very capable, good conversation piece, good reception/sound, no probs w/ the small keys
The floppy disk, the ease of use, chicks love it.
Call quality is not the best. None else!
obvious distortion at edges, bit large
None.
Sleek, Multiple rings, Good battery life
Great durability, good features for the price
Small size
SLOW--wastes time and money
Lots of options, great design
Good picture quality for JPG compression
USB communication problem, more related to my computer than the camera.
Large screen, clear reception and great functions
small size yet retains features of the C-line of Olympus Cameras
Low resolution text, pale color, slow
Somewhat expensive.
Small size, state-of-the-art features, dual display, excellent sound quality, sturdy construction, good looking, good value.
silver color rubs off sometimes, zoom is kinda a waste sometimes
very awkward to collapse
Sleek, silver, and in color, showing off the technology just starting in the US.
cheap, fast
Excellent integration of Palm and phone #13; #10;Great for using in a vehicle
Easy use, flash, 3 1/2 amp;quot; amp;quot; floppy, rechargeable battery, zoom, viewing screen
nice price
Bulky
indestructable, 3 way calling, loud ringer, comes with belt clip
User-friendly, 2.3 MegaPixel, Fun
Slow to write to disk, too expensive for beginners
This model has been discontinued
Lack of interchangeable lenses.
lacks flexibility
poor ergonomics, uses smartmedia
High quality photos.  Very Useful.  Great Close-ups.  I love this camera!
easy to use
Small size, high quality printable images
many features, great quality
Can't think of any...
Excellent image quality, easy to set up with Windows 2000
Good quality and speed to get the result
Easy to use,great pictures, compact yet fits well in hands.
excellent pictures, swivel LCD
Convenient, Great pics, easy to use
horrible battery life
Blue Light (enough said)
Slow transmition from camera to pc. Low batery life (use rechargabes)
Color does not always perform, customer service has major problems
Size, features
A little noisy
Small and surprisingly durable
Very nice; easy to use; prints directly to any Epson Printer; Many adjustments; Amazing resolution; Supports USB; Both Mac and Win;Embedded LCD 1.8 amp;quot; TFT
Great pictures!  Nice battery
Not much room in the paper feeder
Doesn't work worth a damn
Very easy camera to use
As usual, cost of ink
Looks cool, has some neat games
Haven't noticed any
design
Multi-functioning, print quality.
Takes the place of four machines.
easy to fold, rubber wheels, side-by-side seats, full recline
Text Quality  amp;amp; Price
Sometime better to use viewfinder
Small, dependable, tons of features, state-of-the-art
auto-focus can be finicky
Somewhat Expensive but worth every penny!
Under a hundred bucks, 1200 dpi
Terrible OS manufactured in Hell or close to it. Sadistically slow and sluggish.
could be faster with color.
Many features, Easy to use!
Nice print quality
Not compatible with Windows XP
none
Might be a little slow sometimes. Has not polyphonic ringtones.
it has a flash
The Camera pictures are better than other camera phones.
not Bluetooth compatible; can't download rings; awkward to look up numbers by name
Small, Easy to use, Great Clarity
incredibly limited functioning for macs, scanner only for paper
Tiny (stealth), high-quality photos.
Easy to use, good pictures, reasonably priced
None really.
great printing quality, reasonable purchase price
Slow start-up/cycle times, rechargeable battery/charger not included amp;#13; amp;#10;
Wonderful Camera
rather bulky, loud keys, SLOW INTERNET speed
Easy to use, cheap, flash, decent image quality
none
???
Pricey
Good print quality, speed, original cost
Good Photo quality printing
Easy to use, Video and sound function, and Good picture quality
No Vibrate Only Mode, Poor reception
Focusing is a little harder than with a normal camera.
Easy to use, battery stays charges for long periods, lots of accessories,
Good print quality, good photo reproduction, and good price
Features, Size, More Features
Earpiece sucks!
doesn't do action photography easily, high battery drain
Small camera, lightweight,excellent pictures.
Defective and the quality?
none
Simple, no-frills, looks decent, buttons have a good feel, unlike almost all newer phones
no way
Bad driver for USB, expensive toner.
Have to reset the date every time batteries come out.
Eats batteries like the famine is coming tomorrow, only 8mb card included, confusing menu system.
Price. But hey, it's great technology.
Software glitches, occasional crashes, hard to push buttons but I accept them all.
background noise irritates people on other end
Study, long battery life, good reception, good Nokia menus
large photos, great quality
cheap, long-lasting
endless giberish spewing from its print-deck
Crappy "feel" due to cheap detailing, like a plastic toy really. Poor ergonomic design.
Color screen, lightweight, styleish.
Great pictures. Just great.
compact size, high quality pictures, excellent battery life
Size, Size, Size.  2.1 megapixels is all you need!!!
Size, 3.2mp, W/B Histogram, Ease of Use
Size, ease of use, fully-functioned for size
Gorgeous color screen, great battery life
8mb card is too small; LCD drains batteries quickly
Small size, very attractive, durable construction, 4 megapixels, 3x zoom.
expensive and not for infants
Somewhat bulky, service can be expensive
Short battery life
Not GSM 1800, really dense menus
none
Great print Great price
Prints too slow
Photo quality output, Price is low enough
Not capable of doing high quality pics
Few Accessories.
None
No USB connection
takes great pictures
Somewhat bulky by today's standards; small phone book
Great picture. Small and sleek.
Can be frustrating at times
large size
associates fax, phone, mobile, email number under one name
Elegant looks, all the PDA features in one small phone
Std batteries  amp; memory  amp; form factor. Easy to use, good automatic settings.
Terrible battery life, no sound on movies, bulky
Storage drive, write to copy feature, e-mail attachments
sleeky,good
Cuts off when it wants too, less-than-desired battery power, shape is uncomfortable in my hands.
quality pictures
Superb image quality, lots of options, fast download speeds to a PC, AUTO mode is as easy to use as a regular camera, and much more...
not usb, no carrying case or video output
I Hear people before I answer
Ease of Use, Picture Quality
Graphics are about the only thing that's good
Pocket sized, easy to operate
Nokia sacrificed durability for style.
Exposure
expensive toner cartridges
Does not feel durable, earpiece volume not very loud.
convenient
Manual flash, automatic exposure in six differend ways, cheap amp;#13; amp;#10;Stores images to a floppy disk
It has speakerphone, text messaging, and a color display
Delay in taking the picture after the shutter release is pressed.
Phonebook menus could be better
Ease of use, replacing ink less expensive
USB port, economical, speed, high quality
nice looking ,light
Big basket, large wheels, not much else.
Doesn't ring when people call me.  Battery dies horribly indoors.  Makes baby Jesus cry.
Wish it printed faster
Bad cust. support, software flaws
Chows batteries, no lens cover or case
Not completely intuitive menu, no manual white balance
the cost ?
Excellent color, has histogram
Great speed, color printing, and very quiet.
Big CCD, great quality pictures, lots of features.
Poor battery life, bad service reception, garbled audio, poor backlight.
Quality of pics, size, weight
Poor battery life, worthless camera, not as intuitive as LG's
Solid camera body.  Good indoor, email,  amp;amp; smaller printed quality pics.  Very easy to use, and good documentation.
Good quality digital photography, flexibility and software
leather case isn't great, not always getting the best reception.
Uses Compact Flash, AA batteries  amp;amp; takes great pictures
good price
ink cartridges are so expensive you could practically buy a new printer
Not very good action shots
Battery Life, Doesn't like concert lighting
BATTERY CONSUMPTION!!!! Too long saving images to card.
Customer service was helpful, cheap
Hand feel, functionality, performance, internal antenna, changeable covers.
Good resolution  amp;amp; picture quality, easy to use
A nice phone with really handy features and easy navigation system.
Really poor performance for the price
Cheap, decent print quality, can you say DeskJet 930!
Extremely fragile screen display is easily cracked -- phone becomes ruined.
Slim line battery makes you have to charge your phone EVERY DAY!
Ink costs, but so do all multifunction printer ink.
Great pictures, Zoom features, protective covering on the lens.  Easy point and shoot picture taking.
cost
Inexpensive, compact, light, easy to use, wonderfully crisp photos!  A best buy!
GREAT QUALITY,FAST SPEED,NEAT LOOKING,LOTS OF OPTIONS,INEXPENSIVE, AND MOST OF ALL, IT'S MADE BY HP.
Excellent reception, Intuitive menu, speaker phone, excellent voice dial feature.

Good Talk Time, Camera, compact, flip phone.
Menu system is awkward, IRda support in Windows 2000/XP?
Size
Design, build quality, battery life, sound quality
Very high quality, versatile and useful.
one color
Drum unit gave out after 13 months of light home use.
power runs out before pictures do
SLR, Ease of use, accurate color, professional features, 3FPS, 36bit color depth, multi-point focus
Careful of the flash - it can wash out your pictures
Shorter battery life, not many frills (if you care about those -I don't)
Thick, due to clamshell design.  Menus can be cumbersome.
Camera is simple to Use; Save Money, High quality photos; instant photos; view pics on TV, PC, or Camera instantly
Cute and small, Number storage, dual mode, minibrowser, price went down a lot.
Fantastic image quality
No camera, internet service is slow
Sometimes, too fast. (I don't know if that's a con)
Proprietary memory , proprietary battery, slightly hard to press shutter release, low-powered flash
Poor software
Ease of use, good quality printing
Quality text and photo images
No caller id, hands-free headset not functional, and battery charger cover is not practical.
quality print
NONE!
Small and light weight.
Voice helper, excellent quality
Very compact for a double stroller, inexpensive, gets the job done
Expensive ink.
Poor focus, NOt easy to handle with 1 hand. Not enough Manual operation
paper does not feed
The sound is like hearing someone talk out of a box.
Excellent Quality photos, and relatively easy to use.
Little pricey, would like a bigger display
Dirt cheap quality.
Charging problems.  Audio output problems.
Nice quality, good features
No eyepiece, only an LCD display
Compact, MACRO Imaging, Ease of Operation
sleek look color printer
Easy to use,reasonable price range,good picture quality,viewer on camera
Bad battery life, plug location
Excellent resolution, features, split body.
Lots of manual options, incredible feature set, superb four megapixel digital images,
easy to assemble and use, attractive, all-terrain
battery life
Color screen, polyphonic ringtones, very portable.
Quality shots, ease of use, durable, lightweight.
awesome look,feel and design
Outstanding picture quality, pocket size camera, rugged design
impressive macro capability, feature rich, really nice shots!
light   thin, read txt on outer lcd, music player cababilities, touch sensative keys
Full keyboard, exstensive battery life, tons of features
small, robust, great picture quality, good lens, very flexible
Subpar reception, email issues, flimsy feeling case, slow support response
Gulps ink.
*Reprint button could be security risk *Immature OS X drivers, not on CD *Not upgradable
none that I can find
Videos are grainy, camera is still a bit thick, and battery could last longer.
Small for a palm, large for a phone
Sucks ink like Dracula sucks blood.
Easy to use, high quality printing
easy-to-use, inexpensive, compact, marginal image quality
Extremely difficult to get running under Win2000
high resolution, compact, portable, easy to use
high quality, ease of use, stores pictures of floppy disk
No flash; Software is horrible
Long Battery Life, Nice Size, Great Design, Walke Talkie, Most Normal Features, Cheap
nothing really
B W external display, poorly placed volume rocker
Color Print Quality, Tiny Ink Cartridges
cost a lot
Small, Stylish, Good battery life, speed and voice dialing
quiet and efficient
small, clear sound, good batter life
high quality, saves pictures onto CDs, long-lasting battery, video clips
nothing
a little big and heavy
compact, double fold, nylon fabric
Look, feel, reception, battery life, sound quality, and personalization.
Nose hits LCD when looking through rangefinder, Battery life is a bit short
Expensive Ink Cartridges
Great features for the price, easy to use.
Floppy Disk Storage, LCD Panel to see Pictures
Button cover pops off, hard to cut on and off.
Small storage (you use a lot of disks)
Reception. Battery Life. Easy to read display. Sync with PC software. Durability.
Few second wait for picture, price, battery use.
cant really grumble at much at all
Many great deals for this phone
Small, sleek, sturdy,world-class, recognizable
Excellent, rich color photos; easy to use
Small, nice design. Clear display. Inexpensive.
excellent quick TIFF, easy of use, good battery
price and 8 megs of memory
Good basic phone, all the expected features, plus GPS ability
Cons ?,Cons ?, Seriously,I have only minor gripes with small C/F card supplied.
Close-up capability
Good Solid Camera for everyone.
battery life, upload time
slower than multi-purpose printers, uses a lot of ink, tricky calibration
wish it had more zoom
Larger than phones with comparable features
Easy to use,light,big storage basket
Standard Floppy Disks for media storage, Great quality, Ability to take lots of pictures for a little price and determine which pictures to print
Tiny,Flash(many cardcams lack one),2mb,docking station that charges and uploads via usb(nice looking too!)
Ease of use, very good pictures inside with no movement
It fits in my pocket.
no preview window, no flash
Too Many to list in 15 words
Tiny, cute, lightweight, many features, great volume, access to the internet
Out of the box digital camera
Lightweight, small footprint, extended features
It's HUGE, quite expensive and the software crashes.
Relatively cheap
rather large
Good Pics and a good all-around camera, except. . .
Easy to use, 1 Megapixel
Awesome Performance, Excellent Pictures and Sharp Crisp Images, Great Tele-Photo
battery life, reception, size, gprs data, screen, usb connection
Wheels NEVER worked - I bought/returned 3 Maclaren Mistrals.  Awkward brakes.
Expensive, useless basket.
Does everything it was meant to do and does it very well.
big stroller
Plastic LCD, flimsy USB/Video cover, battery charger.
Joint for flip creaks on mine, not a lot of features.
quality prints-software great-good use of ink
Sometimes has printing errors.
Huge storage basket, entertaining toys in front, fits most infant carriers
has some problems with excel spreadsheets
Extremely lightweight, cute and ALWAYS has a signal!
Low cost, compact flash technology
no power switch! bad paper tray setup
ziess lens, B amp;W mode, mpeg mode, style
short battery life
Small, Takes Great Pictures, Easy Computer Interface
It has a am/fm radio that you can listen to with ear piece
In a word reliabilty
Minimal, Bluetooth, GPRS, WAP
Front "mirror" gets dirty, charger can be annoying, no analog mode
Awesome quality printing
Quality, speed, quiet
Battery life :(
Easy to Use, Great LCD display, Nice photos
You dont have to waste your money developing unwanted pictures.
Corel incompatibilities
large screen, auto-complete
EVERYTHING ELSE!!!!
Battery hungry with lcd on, advanced features take some learning
Great Sony quality, clear images/resolution
No flash, no viewfinder!
Great portable printer, fast
the keys start to skuff the body, bad design.
Great little camera for the price. Extremely easy to use.
A left-handed person and this phone are not compatibile.
Easy directions, great size
Small, 4 megapixels, sleek looking, no delay to snap a picture, idiot proof
Cheap, good printing
none
TFT color display, Ringers   Wallpaper, Web Display, External Display
2x optical zoom, internal lens cover, basic and easy to understand controls
Fast printing, Excellent print quality, HP warranty, duplex module,  amp; low price
Compared to some phones now, it may be big and it doesn't have color screen
Eats up batteries, no A/C adapter, no video output
price
sound quality, reception
batteries used up very fast, no optical zoom
read below
A phone you can trust for its functionality and construction
Easy to break/ wear charger design, phone freezes and lags at times
Durability is questionable, price per page seems high, limited driver support, can't print on both sides of the page
inexpensive
Has lasted a few years
Price
Great Color, low price Parallel Port
not near photoquality prints, fuzzy LCD display
Massive storage capability.  Good battery life.  Multiple burst image is a nice feature
Photos could have warmer colors.  Flash could also be better.
Reception, bright screen, EVDO, speaker phone, 1 megapixel camera, battery life, MP3 support
30 Second Delay When Using Duplexer / Ink is a Ripoff
none
Slim, durable, good sound quality, decent battery life for such a small unit
Rear footboard, folds up small, comfy for both kids, adjustable handles, sturdy but light
Ink not available everywhere.
price
cheap, reception,, features
no camera case!
larger  footprint than some printers
Good price for resolution and ease of use
low radiation, low cost on phone
Ink cartridge prices. Unit quality.
Nobody can hear me when I am speaking to them on this phone.
long download times
Prints slightly skewed, no USB connections, Noise.  Annoying sterile robotic voice  which repeats error and need messages (i.e. out of paper, etc.).
rechargeable battery, blurry when max out zoom
Pictures vey sharp
Wieght
Won't serve a cup of coffee (but it will print a great one!)
Should only be used as a PHOTO PRINTER!
Ink harder to find
External caller ID, Voice Dialing, FM Stereo Radio, VoiceNote voice Recorder, Compactness
Mediocre user interface; lacks the panache of other Verizon phones
A bit noisy, Nikon should have built it around a 4 megapixel CCD. amp;#13; amp;#10;
Top quality pictures, ease of use, great choice of modes and individual control.
Being able to  amp;quot;contain amp;quot; an active preschooler
great photos, good price
Battery Life
Picture quality,  3 X zoom
Price was a bit steep, and only comes with a 16mb card.
Amazing reception, vibrant color screen, 1.3megapixel camera, Attractive Design
Reliable and  TOUGH!  Performs to Specs.
perfect style-designed, high quality
none!
Expensive, easy to damage, cuts off alot
Really weird cable hookup, weird case design, no power button,  amp; big footprint
Perfect ligting or no picture, software hangs in XP, wrong website URL on packaging.
Print quality, rather slow
ink runs out quick
Lightweight, easy to use, free
Digital-only single-band phone (no analog roaming); may be useless in an emergency
Free.  That's it.
Inadequate flash/red-eye, power consumption, relatively high price, slow response time
Size, durability, rechargeable battery, long-battery life
Color rendition not always accurate, lens cap, slow auto focus, rechargeable battery not included.
somewhat flimsy cover, no PC connection
Tech support virtually non-existent;
No optical zoom, hard to use "enter" key, long charge time, movies with-out sound
batteries don't last when using high draw modes
Noisy feeder, pretty big
Small, great looking phone
Not "automatic" in downloading to PC; support only via phone not e-mail
Small. Lightweight.
Call Quality, lots of features including a Planner, Durable, E911, built-in answering machine
lt;b gt;Loves lt;/b gt; to print text...I got it cheap...includes good software
LCD could be larger / more neg. tilt, Only 3x optical, camera resets to factory.
cheap and small, color faxing
More fragile then any other Nextel, not as small as conventional cell phones.
may be too small, aftermarket products hard to find, expensive
Feeding mechanism
Print feeder jams, slow printing, only one cartridge at a time.
Pictures, Product construction, Battery life
cost
Digital,large backlit display and buttons,loaded,accs available in superstores
none
cost of cartridges and frequent loss of communication with PC errors
Great pictures, easy to use, macro and zoom
too hard to operate
Ease of use
Loud speaker phone, flip-design, large screen, clear display
Noise sometimes visible, No USB connection, no "real focus ring"
Unless you want to be aggrevated, don't buy this phone
so many features, works well for me
That ink can get PRICEY (surprise surprise!)
Not particularly good for printing out 4x6 or other normal photo sized prints.
affordable
Compact, Durable for the size, great reception.
Ring is a little low (I don't always hear it in my handbag).
Fantastic, bright lens, intuitive controls (for most-used features), great picture quality
Good picture view, outstanding picture quality, so convenient and versatile.
Print cartridge (print head) died within a year.
Bad reception, low ring volume.
battery life, not as durable as most cell phones
Decent print quality, low price
Don't buy for it's scanning capabilities...
Poor battery life, no USB connection, lose quality when use zoom.
Extremely reliable, medium cool factor for younger people
takes pics
Fastest general purpose inkjet around. Excellent output quality.
Highest quality printer
The best picture quality I've seen the cameras in that price range!
none
Compact, high quality, complete control AND video!
Tight hinge/difficult to open with one hand, camera only good in bright light
Features, and loads of them!
Battery Life Limited., Included Memory Limited.
Nice pictures
Great pics, portable. mpeg, swivel lens
Image stabilization.  10x zoom eliminates penalty of 2.1 megapixels.
Confusing software, short battery life.
No power switch.
learning curve, battery eater
Poor shutter lag, bulky, battery hog
No flashy features, long address book
A disaster! Software crashed my computer.
Date/Time too small.  Ear and Spkrphone volume too low.  Poor talk time.
Quiet speaker, unreliable keypad, lack of decent appointment alerts, poor Bluetooth range
Cheap, light weight and easy to use
Easy to use and setup,cheap.
could be smaller
none
Hard to push and maneuver
None
Jams a lot, fairly costly ink
Uses XD which isn't readily available, zoom is in awkward place
Flawed, gaps in casing.
Size, Price
smallish size
Can be SLOW; You have to buy your cables, which adds to the cost
compact   functional
Easy to use and quality pictures
Slow as hell
Poor manual controls unsuitable for pros
Size, initial cost (street price $290-$350)
color is too expensive
Free
Annoying preset buttons, wind noise in hands free earphones (sometimes), On/Off button position.
Fairly reliable; excellent battery life; easy to use
Hard to see LCD screen, no viewfinder, no flash, can't use it indoors
Some red eye
Darn near everything else.
Lots of features
I own this camera, and its the best digital camera I have ever had!!!
Sometimes confusing menus and dorky antenna
cheap, reliable and small
Easy to use, great resolution, inexpensive
Easy to lear, good resolution, inexpensive
Images taken using the flash
Runs smoothly, rugged.
Easy to use, Uses floppy disks, no extras needed to get up and clicking
Compact size, relative ease of use.
The printer uses its ink very quickly
easy, compact, self timer
It Lies To You
High Speed, Very Quiet, Instant On Feature, Double Sided Printing
Reliable, quality printing
EXCELLENT signal reception and clear calls.  Good build quality.  Convenient design. Full featured. Battery life.
Great quality for reasonable price
Limited picture adjustment facilities, batteries take an age to charge and run out quickly
Switching Cartridges and re-aligning quite often!
small card to being with (8mb); thats it!!!
Definitely needs a memory card, a few weak points but nothing serious
It's small and cheap
nice color, easy, compact, uses CF, AA battery and USB, long exposure
This camera takes excellent pictures and it's very easy to transfer them to the computer.
Pull-Out Antenna, Tri-Mode, WebBrowser and Text Msging Enabled
You go through too many batteries, can't use rechargable ones
Jams easily, won't pick up paper, overheats, and hangs up a lot.
Antenna. 'Nuf said.
great value, decent quality
Pics of my finger, digital zoom
Small, light weight design and a colorful display.
No rechargeable batteries amp;#13; amp;#10;Two  amp;#145;hot pixels amp;#146; in my night time shots amp;#13; amp;#10;Lens cap amp;#13; amp;#10;
I have None
too new to find one
a bit slow for text but its not really meant for that. Costly ink cartridges
It looks pretty with flashing blue lights
Horrible service in the CNY area, poor video quality, snapshot noise when photo is taken
Great performance for the price
keypad light distracting, small buttons, on/off switch requires heavy hand
a flip phone that has no protection for the main screen.
Goes thru batteries like a hot knife thru butter. Grainy pics of far objects.
fast, inexpensive
A little bulky, no aperture priority or shutter priority exposure modes
No cons I can find except SD card song recognition.Small plastic covers easy lost.
IR port, network-ready version (the TN), speed
great photo's and service seems great (so far)
No face protection, have to manually set clock and date, weird email setup.
Sub standard quality for all features
envelop slot and 4x6 photo slot jams, outrageous prices on ink.
none for the price
Print Quality, Ease of Setup  amp;amp; Use, Price, Size
easy to use, e-mail, messages, alarm clock, etc.
Great reception and excellent battery life
Just about everything else... Read and discover...
Static, dropped calls, unpredictable ring tones
slow, loud, quick to use ink
No Continuous Zoom, Lens doesn't swivel, Long warm-up time, Photowise 2.1.2 lacks features of earlier versions, LCD has slow scan rate
Low price for so much. Lots of room.
Great multifunction capability, media slots, great prints  amp;#13; amp;#10;
Software a little buggy, slow response, slippery plastic body
Haven't come across any yet.
Printing picture quality not so great
small color cartridges and they cost too much
New problem every month.
Still a TAD bulky, Application instabilities, only acceptable battery life, Pricey, Palm-based
Black  amp; White Speed Demon; amp;#13; amp;#10;Non Epson brand generic Cartridge Usable; amp;#13; amp;#10;Good for office usage.
Very sharp, clear image. Fast shots on moving objects. Un-limited video clips. Sharp night shots.
buttons are super small, menus are like programming a VCR
quality printouts, dependable
Good entry level printer
Email is useful. From my computer, I  email my grocery shopping list to myself.
HP software conflicts with some systems, HP support poor
Kind of big.
At least it didn't explode
Cannot use CF II cards, LCD in bright sunlight, comes w/ only an 8MB card
bulky
Easy to use, great pictures
Ring tones, Pictures, Battery, Battery, Battery....
Not the greatest reception, best not used as a phone
Flip up flash, picture review limitations
sound clarity, keyboard size
Great Quality
None found, yet
Abysmal support, quickly orphaned
Outstanding quality, Physical appearance is good, Easy to use, Good software
if you review your photos often the battery does run out quick
But it uses the battery!
eats batteries quickly
Eats 4 AA batteries for breakfast, lunch and dinner and still some!!!
excellent image quality, decent speed, good looking
Eats ink. Eats ink.
Annoying if you are forgetful.
On the bulky side, hard to find in stores
Flip-phone style, ease of use
Slim Design, Camera, Bluetooth, Internal Antenna, High Res Display.
Good image quality. Easy to use. Good software package included.
battery time not enough,Ringer to low   not many options of rings or games.
Good for a first time digital camera user.
Not quite pager sized (Hey, It's all I could think of!).
None yet
size
Mundane styling, accessories not widely available, menus can be confusing
TOO MANY FUNCTIONS!!
Black bands/coags after a few sheets
battery consumption, picture storage time
batteries need to be replaced often
10x zoom, image stabilizer, accurate colors, sharp lens
Pricey, the zoom is weaker than Gandhi
Good graphics, loud enough, game
Print resolution, Style.
Charging defect, counter-intuitive interface.
Excellent stabilized zoom, easy to use, creative energies can be used due to the ability to set shutter speed and aperture settings manually, camera is good for twilight and night shots,etc.
Great reception.  Easy to use features.  Great size.
point amp;amp;shoot,delete if  you don't like
Did not come with a battery charger for the car.
Works just about everywhere, light weight, battery life
Big screen, good battery life, clear connection, quality camera
6 ppm black 5 ppm color, long lasting ink cartridges
Small, lightweight, silent allert.
Price, picture quality, size
expensive, large size can make in hard to move
Unstable firmware, parks in tele mode
LCD gets washed out, very weak signal strength, problems with charging and headset
Voracious appetite for batteries
Great price, excellent performance
quality
Not as good on large groups, but good
Inexpensive, easy to install and use
Small, light, solid construction
Crisp output; multi-functional; individual ink cartridges save money.
size
Quiet ring tones, GRPS service not available everywhere.
Fun, relatively easy to use, makes short video clips, good pictures
Small size, external LCD, nice design, voice dialing, cool features
Picture quality
beats scanning images with a scanner
Many cool options, Great sound, Easy to use
Overall Good Camera for the $$
High Ink costs (I am told), Flimsy output tray.
jack of all trades
Great when it works, Great in handling multiple paper sizes.
2.1 megapixel, ease of use, color rendition pretty accurate, tracking on viewfinder better than older models
I like the size and style of the 8310.
Too many adapters to get used to
To Many Lights,It Lacks A Color Screen
Price of ink cartridges
No more Verizon support.  Unreliable keys.  Battery life.  Software response delays.  Infuriating pop-ups.
Short battery life, only 2x digital zoom, expensive batteries
compact, durable, chicks dig it, ease of use, lcd on outside with caller id
Small for multifunctional printer. Other than that it's horrible!
cleans up printheads a lot, uses ink
clear pictures, fast
Driver did not work initially
It doesn't allow you to refill cartridges and sometimes has problems feeding paper.
slow
Heavy, not built for turbulence.....
Easy, many controls
cheap money
eats batteries;
Ring tones are plenty loud enough but sound distorted on the highest setting
Poor picture quality, eats up ink cartridges fast
Large LCD Screen, InfoLithium Batteries  amp;#13; amp;#10;
gadget options, design
auto-focus problem and auto mode set at ISO 400
Cheap and easy to use.
An acutal ring sound, decent display, small/lightweight, good amount of features.
None
none
Frequently dropped calls; poor reception; sparratic powering off; random battery drainage
Good photo quality and images overall, cheap
expensive
lcd/viewfinder is dim in low lighting
Two-way feature, slick look, durable.
It works, it was free
nothing
None yet!
Setup problems, mediocre print speed.
Nothing so far.
Size, Screen, Free extra battery, battery life.
Ease of use, 10x optical zoom
easy to use, very sturdy
None
Delay in capturing image, battery
STYLE NOT VERY ATTRACTIVE
Doesn't show charging indicator; expensive to use V CAST features
Integrated Camera, Call Screening, Dual Color Screens, Fastest Vision Phone I've Tested.
Looks great, very light weight and stylish. External LCD
Caller ID, Alarm clock, Love the choice of face plates
great, crisp photos.
High priced
EZ 2 Use
This model has a loud buzzing sound coming from the ear piece
overpowering flash, LCD screen during outdoor sessions
Pricey at initial roll-out.
No neck strap,only 8mb memory stick
On/off switch not always easy to use.
Inferior reception when compared to the older Nextel phones, high price no longer justified
Very useful.
compatibility issues and Telus
BATTERY LIFE SUCKS, no microphone for movie mode, takes 10 seconds to turn on, PhotoShop would have been nice
High quality printouts (text  amp;amp; graphics), fast
Small, good battery life, sturdy and inexpensive.
Manual poorly written/translated
Ease of set up, speed, quality
A little heavy, slow serial connection
Great pictures. Easy to use. Battery options.
None
Great quality and quiet.
Fast, affordable, very quiet
No GPRS, slightly complicated menu structure.
light, portable, stores images to floppy
Small size, 3.2 megapixel, metal frame, good coolness ratio, excellent photos, proven performer.
Extremely easy to use
Affordable, compact, detailed LCD screen
3x optical zoom, SD/MMC slot, video out, macro mode, easy menus, batteries
This printer produces wet-lab quality photos.  It is fast and economical.
Road-hog software lulls you to sleep, so (hopefully) you won't notice the crummy pictures
Same limitations as any other point and shoot camera.  Need to buy bigger memory card.
Need more pixels!!
No camera, no pre-loaded games, not multi-country useable.
compact, VERY USER FRIENDLY, customer support
Poor outdoor light handling, slow shutter speed, no macro feature and no case.
Clear, good quality pictures
great pictures, easy to manage
Bulky. The con that can't be overcome. Cheesy ringtones.
Easy to use, good image quality, small size, very nice design
Software is a nightmare.  Very unstable.  Technical support is NONEXISTENT.
Great images, comfortable design, good price, easy software/menus
Compact, affordable and easy to use
volume is too soft, lots of dropped calls, undue static, and lack of features
Cool features and great customer service
no camera
Quality of photos; Ability to change aperature and shutter
Antenna is on the weak side
Great features,easy to use,light weight,nice design,exterior caller id
Great picture quality, configurable, hackable, customizeable scripts
Many features, color, long battery life, enhanced phonebook/phone log, instant recording
Excellent picture quality, comes with great software, floppy disks, excellent LCD.
Noisy, large footprint, high ink use
bulky
Larger display than the other nextel phones, longer battery life, better sound quality, java-enabled games
EASY to use! Idiot proof! Just like the commercial.
Sleek and chic, internal camera, good clarity of sound, bluetooth, classic Sony features.
Flip phone, colour screen, camera
Because it is Nokia 8850!Stylish, Durable, Infrared
Can't find a good headset
None yet, other than that it isn't a good text printer.
Great price, quality printing
Great for emailing instant photos to friends
Very sleek look; quality build
2x zoom, battery life
Great value, many features
Great picture quality.  Full of features, yet easy to point and shoot in auto mode.
Cheap to use, excellent print quality, quiet, fast
Flimsy Antenna
Voice mail too hard.
Ease of use, quality of pictures
CD storage, 4 mega-pixels, lengthy video, a wide variety of options and features.
short cut on keypad not available
Mine didn't come with a memory card
Inexpensive.
Excellent lens, CFII c Microdrive, Photo quality
missed calls, not sturdy
Slow
quick, easy to use, dependable
ease of using a floppy disk, price, quality of finished product
everything.bad reception.no signal.  bad battery life.
Funtion
Small, fits anyway, easy to hear, outer LCD screen, lots of options
GREAT VOICE CLARITY/QUALITY; CAMERA; VIDEO-RECORDER; GREAT PHONE BOOK ORGANIZER
easy to use
Yellowish Screen, Picture Noise, Bad Zoom Increments
Take Anywhere Size with full features
Depending on your provider, price can get pretty steep
VERIZON WIRELESS forcing their name to blink on the display!
4mb card, grainy pics
No custom faceplates. Nokia more comfortable in your hand. Nokia simpler to use.
Fast, high quality, low price, ethernet capable
Services and accessories will cost you extra $$$; sleek surface can get smudgy
Easy to use, Great image quality, Battery lasts a long time,
Battery Problems
Great for travel.  Fast shutter release!
Great print for photos and color text; aesthetic design
can't say anything bad about it yet
It looks ....OK.
paper jams are frequent, Goes through Ink faster than you could imagine.
A tad bulky and heavy
None that I see!
an little engineering marvel
umm...
High Cost, A bit slow, A bit bulky, but storage of photos is A+.
limited resolution; flash
reception/camera
SLOW interface, can't store email addresses in phone book, no WAP
The flash doesn't work very well at a distance.
Tricky setup, slow
Fast, friendly, affordable
Great reception. Good ergonomics. Nice screen. Easy to use. Modest price.
Bluetooth not as powerful as it could be. Data cable hard to find.
Easy to use and inexpensive
Expensive, manual not great
Small, light, many features, easy to use, long battery life
Not great battery life
4 way navig. buttons hard to use, macro capability not what I expected
Battery life demands a 2nd battery
Price, text quality
Great picture quality, hotshoe, compact, durable, great for accessories
Small size, good image quality, 2x option,
Color screen, analog roaming
microphone not too good
Slow or difficult low light focusing, Manual focus lag, No PC Socket?
Superb picture quality, ease of operation
cost
Print quality is poor.  Slow
Big Keys, Crisp Screen, Easy to Use, EVERYTHING !
Inexpensive, convenient dock, easy to use, accepts standard batteries.
good design/menus/buttons
Unlimited storage
High price, Cheap phone
Well designed, Well priced, Excellent capabilities
Hate that shutter lag!
Only the size.
A little difficult to change printer cartridges
Double sided printing
Small, light weight, high quality photos
Excellent quality printer. Quick and easy to set up.  Large paper tray.
The way it opens. Battery length
none
Under-powered flash
Paper became aligned slightly incorrectly often, sometimes smeared/
Great reception, well-built (not flimsy), nice big color screens, battery lasts forever.
price effective, voice dialing feature
drops calls
clear, srisp picture, durable camera, good desing, nice features
Nice look, good camera, feels like a phone, not a toy.
Confusing controls.
Ink cartridge runs out quickly and is expensive
Price, LCD Display gets smudged
Software,power,zoom
Versatile, Feature-Packed, Solid Double 3 MegaPixel camera.  MusicCenter (mp3player, fm-radio), Video recorder   player
Ear piece doesn't fit in my ear!!
Great photo print quality; fast print times
Compact size, accurate optical viewfinder, integrated lens cover, bright LCD display, good flash for size/price, fast zoom, included FlashPath floppy disk adapter for SmartMedia cards
no parent tray
great sound, gets good signal (compared to other phones in the same geographic area), voicenotes
Breaks easily (watch out for this), no web access
Color screen, ringtones
Small, portable, great quality pics, easy to use
Fast Digital Copies, Cheap Cartridge, Very Reliable
speed, durability, space
photo quality, usability, noise level
Size, Well back lit, ability to use data kit.
Very compact design, great picture quality.
Crisp and clear speakerphone,loads of features, super screen, it talks to me!
Might seem confusing to first time users.
Fast Black and White printing
It started the technology to give us the 6340I, battery life
compact size, all metal case, fast focus
Requires Bi-Directional Cable, or USB, standard parallel port cable wont' work.
Size, features, ease of use, durability
It works! It's the future! It's here now!
Needs ink jet paper for good text quality
If you want a stroller for an active lifestyle this is the one and only
Price, Size
Beautiful prints, low initial cost
cost, ear bud for hands-free kit.
Battery life is terrible, 8mb memory card included
Crippling hardware and software defects, short battery life, heats up uncomfortably during use, mediocre reception.
canons telephone service it awful.
Lots of features
no WinME drivers, problems in photoshop colors
Poor color quality; mediocre text sharpness; does not print well with Win ME; slow.
Easy to set up,easy to use
LCD screen use drains batteries fast
good sound quality, when it works.
Made in Phillipines, No Physical Manual
Power Pig in Data mode. Battery is very low-tech and under Powered.
inability to upgrade the OS, monochrome screen, no sd, cf or bluetooth
Easy to use, can change the colors on the face and download tones
Addictive!
on camera controls are somewhat hard to work
No zoom, lack of wrist strap, 13-hour charger.
Digital camera and camcorder... oh and it's a phone too!
Printer head had to be replaced twice in 10 months (under warranty, but a hassle none the less).
Small, voice activation features, active infra-red port
Price, size, quality
Fast and great resolution
brakes must be set to fold and basket empty
compact,inherits the Nokia family characteristics,nice color,multi-functions
Great reception, camera is easy to use, very reliable
Good Quality prints and easy setup.
Poor indoor pictures, close ups, and flash.
Gives error sometimes
Floppy storage, good lens
expensive but worth it
Heavy, no Vibrating Battery
3x optical zoom, excellent image quality, fast recycle time
Price, 640X480 mode good
The keypad works most of the time...Not all the time but most
easy to hold, color-changing covers, light and impressive features.
Slow
compatible
Expensive. Only a 3x optical zoom.  lt;i gt;Some lt;/i gt; shutter lag.
Needs computer to retain some settings; may not be Y2K compatible
no clips or carriers exist that allow you to see who's calling without removing first
Great Features
No display of how long current call has lasted, no PC sync ability.
Problems with keypad, face, charger
Small size, no rubber buttons, small buttons.
Light, small, great sound quality
a bit spendy.
No games included, Not bluetooth compatible.
A great machine to have and does a great job for a low price.
great for casual users, nice features for price range, easy to use
Expensive
Great picture quality, very easy to operate, good value
Lack of White Balance options. Proprietary memory. Not pocket-able.
Needlessly difficult to attach to chargers. Headset jack protective flap difficult to open.
All
Speakerphone
larger and a little more expensive,half the pictures on disk
Pictures not very of high quality.  Floppy storage.
Not a true jogging stroller, weight, tires are small, 5 point harness could be better.
Fantastic camera, TC-E3ED teleconverter can shoot the moon, See below
sharp, fast black and white printing; detailed color printing; easy to use
can only print the 1440x720 dpi on special paper
Large Screen, Voice Quality, Gimmick-free phone
Close ups get a little blurry.
Speed, Build Quality
Sleek, compact, performs well
1200 dpi, cheap and reliable
Optimum settings for color-managed work flow not obvious; slow printing for max quality
Watch that battery strength if you use Bluetooth.
auto-focusing is "soft", weak flash, lens visible in viewfinder
Eats batteries
none
Screen can be difficult in full daylight; Joystick occasionally sticks if manhandled excessively; Sub-par camera.
beautiful prints, great workhorse printer, did I say beautiful printing?
Fast picturetaking, good picture quality, good feature set for price
The lens cover gets in my way.
None found
Simple to use, easy set up, excellent quality prints!!!
great photo quality, fast, crisp b amp;amp;w
Innovative Media Storage, Nice Photo features, Great Zoom and View Finder
Great idea, Palm OS was an excellent addition
Hey NICE printer
none to complain of !
The price was good for a entry level digital camera.
Nice look, low price
PRICE,FEATURES AVAILABLE, SIZE,
display, menus, no games preloaded, no units converter, volume controls, speakerphone.
Feeds 2 pages at once occasionally
You must download drivers for windows xp
battery life, no address book synching
12 ppm, 600x 600 resolution, AFFORDABLE!
nothing
Excellent Quality when it works and many features, Great pictures and voice clarity
After only 6 months of use the display area has gone blank .
Good image quality; battery life
Sharp optics.  Easy to use.
Comes with a small memory card, flash is a bit weak.
A storage and power hog. It can get expensive fast.
Camera is so user friendly. Has all the options.
makes a good paperweight, looks impressive
Small, Colorful LCD,easy to use
Camera, takes getting used to, mediocre battery
- small, low power consumption, decent outdoor pictures, fast USB connection
Great Quality, Cheap, Easy Installation, Speedy, Top Loading, Good Interface
LOADED with many pleasing features AND it's BEAUTIFUL!
Understated
Screen under sun light, buttons can be small for some
Stalls computer.  Expensive.
Great features, love the ability to change face plates
Low cost,excellent reception,voice activation,battery life,and bluetooth compatible.
Nice camera BUT!!!
When printing photos, ink takes a long time to dry.
1 Megapixel, Price, Zoom, Easy to use, great indoor quality.
settings are confusing
I had good coverage with Cingular.
beautiful; small   light-weight; backlighting; three alarms settable; rings (if you're into them)
Paid so much I'm afraid to take it places
Picture quality
Small size.  Nice color screen indoors.
Great Quality photographs, Compact Flash Card, Worth it's weight in gold!
none i have found
It's not as cool looking as the 8890
Mediocre battery life.  Definitely get a rechargeable battery.
Folds up easily, runs smoothly, lets my son look around at the scenery.
HIGH quality output, whisper quiet, printout lifetime (with matte paper)
great colour screen, polyphonic ringtones, games, keypad nice and big
Nice Size, Easy to Use
Higher Resolution, Slower Printing
Doesn't have the digital card I would have liked.
Easy to use  amp;amp; awesome clear pictures
1.3 MP camera, TransFlash chip, VCAST, EVDO, Bluetooth
Grainy Picture, Dull Picture, No Speed, LOUD !!
Should come bundled with larger memory card and rechargeable batteries!
none
Picture quality is A+
Colour, Small, Light, good-looking, well featured, Lots of technology
Not quite compatible with all old accessories, battery life
delicate casing, few bugs (volume), still Sprint
image quality, value,ease of use
Sharp images, inexpensive
Small Size, Fashionable Design, Fun Ring Tones
Inexpensive, easy to upload, easy to carry around, good picture quality
High print cost, not dependable
great quality, decent price
Battery life is problematic. Slow camera reaction makes timing snapshots difficult.
size
be careful to use suitable paper.
Slow image construction time. Requires heavy pressure for shutter button to register.
high quality photos
Ringer not loud enough, camera a joke and customer service practically non existent.
Great zoom, red eye reduction
Rugged, compact case.  Great optics, manual controls
Blurry Action Shots
UK Price barrier maybe - but worth it!
Excellent quality, reliable, easy to use.
Brain Tumors
Price and lens cap cover not attached to the camera.
Looks cool
none
Fast, easy software installation, DuraBright water resistant ink.
ink cost
Very easy to use but lots of options for those who want to  amp;quot;fine tune amp;quot; picture taking
n/a
Blue Sky Seems Green, Slow Time Between Shots.
Size/USB Interface/Storage Capacity/2Mpixels/Zoom/Menu
Only comes with a 16MB card
Superb color, outstanding Macro, easy to use auto features
incredible quality for low price, ease of use, expandable memory
UNSTABLE! Low seat, uncomfortable ride, small basket, doesn't stand when folded,
Definetly worthwhile for the price
Pricey ink
Great camera for a great price
Needs a better zoom lens feature
Great for close up
warning the ink is running out
Small for a flip phone, dual LCD displays, sturdy, easy to use interface, includes headset
Very inexpensive printer and ink
Nothing I can think of
none
Can't always tell the quality of the photo from the small lcd
8 mb supplied card is weak! :) Advanced features can seem overwhelming.
Cheap, ergonomic shape, menu easy to navigate, good selection of graphics and ringtones-very personalizable
4 megapixel, small size, good quality construction, ease of use, battery.
Very poor reception, no normal ringers, tinny sound quality
Photo Quality Prints
QWERT keyboard, fits like a pager, many options and voice control commnads
Still a bit pricy, but well worth it.
Superb Quality, Laser-Like Speed, Double Sided Printing
Excellent Value.....Inexpensive not Cheap
Many features.
Battery life, no manual focus.
No tripod mount, no self-timer, poor bundled software.
It's small, lightweight and easy to carry. Good PDA funtions.
large footprint, inadequate memory
Easy to use.  Transfer pictures, movies, mp3s, contacts, and calender.
Easy to use, multifunctional
A Combi, Can break if not careful, 3 point harness
Nothing but trouble!!!
No AC adapter included
No USB support
Battery life, listen only speakerphone, data connectivity, light weight
Way to hard to charge!!
paper jams sometimes and expensive cartridges
blocks roaming charges, nice looking, sturdy antenna
Good picture quality for still items. It is under $400.
Great color and resolution, good resolution on avi video.
No real zoom
LOUD ring, easy navigation, overall fairly user friendly, cute looking
vague manual
Picture quality, portability
Voice dial, high number holding capacity
Poor antenna design. Can give you shocks while charging.
Better digital signal reception; decent sound.
It's small and has many functions, and the discs hold a lot of pictures.
Small, voice activation features, active infra-red port
No media player music when you close the phone.
Lens cap could be tighter; no saving in TIF format; plastic card holder door.
Small, lightweight, but sturdy.  Price.
None so far
if you phone is unlocked be careful of whos name you say, you might accidently call them.
more expensive to print pictures
Usability, Design, Colour Screen, Good Reception, Connectivity, Fun Features.
Not the best quality photos
May not fit into small car
BIG (not well-suited for sitting on the desk)
Great phone all around.
Does not fold up, somewhat larger than the competition.
Fast, very clear, very reliable
better for business
Small slim size, aesthetic appeal
Size, voice dialing capability, accessories
Very delicate. horrible signal quality, slow moving thru the menus
Print quality
TINY, TINY, TINY.  Huge improvements over the S100.  Great battery life
Many features for one low price, quiet operation.
Major driver problems
Failure to communicate with my computer or Windows XP
not excellent quality, some speed problems
Resolution, Magnesium Body, USB Interface
Slick look. Small form factor. Bluetooth. Camera. Wireless web
The display  screen,ringer tones,style,performance and price.
Additional phone time can be expensive if you do not shop around.
Easy to change options, clarity of preview, great zoom quality
Vivid pictures and photographic prints
Can only use NiMh batteries, and supplied charger too slow. No wrist strap included.
The best looking phone I've seen
no camera, scratch prone
great color, works well, went down in prices
Never prints in color.
Slow color printer, expensive ink refills
It needs to come with an Ac adapter and rechargeable batteries
Excellent Color
Can't easily find accessories for it...
Battery usage
small size, good games, lots of rings, battery life w/standby.
this phone is very easy to use and has good reception, clear as a bell.
Fast clear print quality
Prints fast and looks nice. Reasonably priced ink cartridges.
very good phone
View screen instant review. point and shoot, high resolution photos
Does it all and does it well
Clear, bright display, easy to use.
Quiet, fast, new design
Good looks and excellent sound quality
some parts feel a little flimsy, cartridge storage can be awkward
too easy
Multiple functions: scanner, fax, copier, printer
Fabulous lens, great pictures, many "35mm pro" features
fast, good quality, cheap, reliable name brand
None
design, compatability (size), external lcd, polyphonic ringers
External silence button that silences phone sometimes, less than desireable ringer/vibrate options.
It is cheap.
bad in low lighting situations
Speedy, excellent quality
noisy, 1 yr. limited warranty
low light focusing is poor
Dropping features unexpectedly and permanently. I take very good care of my phone.
Price, ease of use, AC adapter
Quality
none
Professional Quality Digital
not very durable
none
Drinks ink like a fish, tends to jam quasi-frequently
No MP3 or GPS
Size!!
Find them onsale, cheep, decent
Minor niggles in some functionality, lack of integration of some features.
High quality camera. GPS. WIFI. Light, compact design. Easy to sync.
The phone is light-weight and easily fits in any purse or brief case.
Small, many features, voice-activation
Standard battery is horrible!
Blurry pictures if you aren't very still, no flash, lose power and pics are gone
Screen color is limited, vision content is lacking
None!!!
Good Quality Pictures. Easy to use. Price was great!
Battery gets hot
Lightweight, intuitive interface, long battery life, loaded with features, great price
Costly paper and ink, and not much paper to choose from by Epson
poor battery life. ear burner. constant reboots. looses signal.
Small and light weight
Not much
Printer cartridges are expensive
no manual focus; 32Mb limit; hard to auto-focus in lowlight conditions
5190
Software is weak, menu systems need to be revised, no case
Good Price
design flaws and missing features, marginal image quality
I paid money for it!
sports,
Included batteries, no protective case included
Ink and the Canon Photo Paper Pro is very expensive
Small Paper Feed, Noisy
Photo color reproduction poor
SMALL EASY TO CARRY
EXPENSIVE CARTRIDGES
Looks great,works great, easy to use
poor resolution, short battery life, small memory capacity, limited features
Low megapixel, Poor picture quality indoors, limited extra features.
Beautiful screen.
No blue tooth, no zoom in or flash function on camera.
Photo quality is still not quite up to Epson standards
The cases of the phone are limited in color.
Small size, nice display, ergonomic, nice display on outside of clamshell, large  easily accessably keypad
battery life, can't download ringers
Goes through batteries quickly- invest in a battery charger.
Phone book not alphabetical, Manual not helpful, Menus sometimes cumbersome
No rechargable battery
Small internal memory
It costs $99.00.....
Competition display and features
small memory stick, needs ring light for macro subjects
Speed!!!. Durabrite Inks. Separate ink tanks.
Great Quality Pictures for the price, Small and Compact, low price
No included AC adapter, the whole "doesn't freakin' work" thing is a big con too.
Ringtones are limited.
Cheap, good prints, easy to use, can take a beating
None yet
Very easy to use
no zoom or extra features
Loaded With Features, Great Price, Intuitive, Good Quality
Everything else
software problem ,ring tones not load enough ,
Gotta find a belt clip somewhere
2.1 megapixel with 3.3 capable. custom scripting, point and shoot
Great quality print--both text and images, including photos, quick set-up, 1200 x 1200 resulotion
quality
Screen, camera, easy to follow menus, lot more features than I will probably ever use.
No battery status indicator, Shutter lag ( ALL average digital cameras have it )#!%$!
SLR feel, long zoom, macro, user-friendly
cheaper rates, larger range
Excellent quality printing and never fails.
low cost
Flakey drivers, compact flash reader not that useful, missing next-generation features
ear speaker sometimes gets warm during extended conversations
poorly designed function index
Bad paper feed mechanism, Expensive consumables
none
10x Optical Zoom, Image Stabilization, Great Controls
Sharp Photos at 2.0 Mega Pixels, Good brand, and User Friendly
Expensive, Only 8MB, Steady hand required, Battery hog, Can't find substitutes for expensive accessories
Talk time not as long as advertised
Not as sharp as some new inkjets
GREAT PHOTO QUALITY!!! six color inks, ALL SOFTWARE WORKS ON MAC OS X
Sprint PCS system is overloaded
Noisy
Battery Life, distinctive ringers(see desc.)
excellent print quality, couldn't be easier to use
The drum kit burns light weight glossy paper, too high of heat.
Very user friendly, great close-up capabilities
red-eye, poor flash range, hard to focus in low light
The quality is fine for a home printer.
Smallish Buttons
Eats Batteries Like Crazy
Quality printing, great price
prints clearly
Easy to use, small, and a good size LCD.
Phone is clear and signal reception is very good.  Stylish.
good reception,light , and easy to use
Joy stick control, voice dailing, good customer service
No optical zoom / consumes batteries fast
Compact and intuitive
Short battery life.
Somewhat expensive; big; slow?
Limited Features
Good value cam for 1-megapixel camera
picture quality
Too new for accessories, not a very good signal
Size, color quality, Options, Battery.
None
Clarity, reception, size, overall quality.
Camera, Internet too easy to get too by mistake
Movie mode not that great!
Weight, size, battery, antenna, shell
Picture quality, Diskettes
flimsy, short handles
Wireless web browser is slow and sometimes unreliable.
Size, sound clarity, digital
Small size
Good menu selection and features
None
Drivers have a tendancy to be tempramental.
Separate color tanks
Very heavy and big.  Slow to return from standby.
Spendy.
Speed, color
Inexpensive, easy to use, good quality.
They forgot my manual! Noisy
4mb Picture Card
Great functions, easy to install, fills it purpose.
A bit expensive
Has mortgage calculator built in, unlimited free incoming calls.
easy-to-use, smart image manipulation software, good quality images
if i need to pick something - size
battery
Loud, cartridges have to be cleaned for real quality color
Speakerphone, lightweight, great battery life w/ monitoring
Great Pictures. Ease of use. Great built in bonus features (passport size photos etc..)
battery life
Falls apart
Good battery life
Small screen, terrible voice dialing, bad swivel case
Easy to use compact flash, good quality supporting software, movie mode w/audio, ease of use
should come with an AC adapter
lots of practical features; gorgeous image; raw/tiff format; great ergonomics  amp; a real beauty
sucks up battery energy, but rechargeables work great.
Great Image quality
Small initial cost      Instant photos
Low light performance, Expensive, Does not fully support Nikon branded speedlight support
Haven't found any yet!
Slow, noisy, print longevity
Low Battery Life (turn the screen off when ever not in use to conserve battery life)
hard to delet pics
Analog.  Fragile antenna.
Inexpensive, ink is cheap, good quality
None that I've experienced
battery life
Battery life, no roaming
Easy to use.  Transfer pictures, movies, mp3s, contacts, and calender.
High Quality at a very affordable price. Easy to set up
Have had many problems with it
Good, Solid Performer, Very Easy to Use
USB and Parallel, Excellent print quality
the manual isn't very good
Needs viewing window for canopy. Basket impossible to reach when fully reclined.
Ease of use, low maintance, highly reliable
Functions very well as a webcam, good storage capacity
none at this time
Cute design
slight paper handling issue
small, beautiful picture quality
great battery life; durable
Excellent Quality, extremely flexible.
Photo software is pretty cheesy; Included memory card is almost worthless.
Inexpensive, great print quality, uses little ink per print, rarely ever jams, can print envelops, prints quickly.
Animation of the phone was cool
Nice, compact, decent pictures and lots of user controls
Design, built quality, all that features
Size, design, keypad, scratch resistant metal.
Very heavy and takes up too much room
Beautiful HI RES pictures achieved! Fair pricing!
Deer in the headlight looks with indoor shots. Focus slow and hard to keep.
battery life doesn't last past a couple hours
not photo-quality for largest pictures
Kinda blocky and non-ergonomic
Nice color screen, changeable faceplates, flip design, camera attachment
Excellent Quality when it works and many features, Great pictures and voice clarity
Instruction manual must be downloaded from the web (PDF).
Not many games #13; #10;No alarm function (not that important)
Heavy! Ugly yellow-ish backlighting
Good pictures. Nice feel and design. amp;#13; amp;#10;
small display, no games, could be easier to scroll through phonebook, headset is a joke
Awful in low light, never ready when you are.
everything
Great color! Great picture capacity for the camera! Awesome battery life! Sleek style! Decent Pictures
global access
small screen size; slow remote syncs
very easy to use
Tons of Features
Awkward placement of zoom buttons; where's autopreview?
I'd probably have to sum it up to QUALITY, QUALITY, QUALITY!
Haven't discovered any as of yet
Low paper capacity
No lens cap!  Keeps BREAKING!!!
Backlight is ok for phone functions, but useless for Palm apps.
voice dialing.
Uses a lot of ink
image size and quality
Bad paper feeding., Cartridges not refillable.
Limited battery life.
limited manual mode flexibility.
Polyphonic ring tones, loads of talk time, way better than Motorola c331
low resolution, short battery life
Great battery life and highly affordable
Cheap price, Pretty durable, Decent battery life
Battery, styling, size, just about everything.
Image Quality, Connectivity, Build Quality and style, rock solid drivers
Cost (But still worth it)
none
3x Optical Zoom, Excellent Picture Quality, Awesome Battery Life.
28mm-200mm zoom,4xAA batteries,manual zoom,49mm filter thread,elec.viewfinder
Clear, crisp, quick printing. Economy print option to save on ink cartridges.
None
Speed, Quality
Cheap.
waist belt difficult to unfasten
Poor contact management, can't feel keys, No IR port, Poor battery life with Bluetooth enabled
Rather big and bulky compared to other phones on the market.
Bad reception   no clock while locked.
loaded with functions, voice ringer and battery life
Size, battery life, features.
Horrible speakers, battery indicator, keypad lock features, voice-activated dial...
Reception rocks, easy interface, speakerphone, reception, clairity is good, did I mention reception?
LCD viewfinder smudges easily from your nose, no ac adapter
uses batteries way tooooooo fast
Only 2X zoom
Great resolution,great feel, weatherproof and much much more.
Low quality, cost of ink, single cartridge system.
Shopping around for the best price
Excellent, photo realistic printing with optional photo cartridge. amp;#13; amp;#10;Price. amp;#13; amp;#10;Overall value for the money.
Pretty good quality printing
Phone's menu orientation better than earlier Motorolas but still baffeling at times.
None so far.
Small, nice pictures.
Easy, Convenient, Lightweight
Stylish,compact,lightweight
Displays not readable in sunlight.
3/5 inch floppy
Prints Photos slowly with low-quality, Extremely LONG "Warm-Up" period before printing. No Parallel.
Diskette storage, long battery life, quick recharge
Inexpensive, durable, compact
Why  I wanted to buy another NOKIA, is It's one of the better cell phones
Handy Size, reasonably logic functions
Camera Quality, Plastic Housing On Battery
bulky, poor battery life, screen not visible in sunlight
The most stylish phone you can get that isn't a Vertu.
Phone has been through repairs, hard to get certain parts, no good speakerphone options
high cost of ink cartridges - and specialty papers
Slow Autofocus, poor low light focus, small memory card, no rechargeable batteries
Holster, screen, battery, CAN'T DOWNLOAD PICS!!
Excellent reception, Small, sleek
Flush keypad can cause miss keying.
Ease of use, Cost effective.
Great Photo Quality
Big, no games, counter-intuitive, badly designed, bad earpiece
uses lots of batteries
Small storage basket, no built in cup holders.
Paper capacity
Affordable
excelent sound quality, stylish, compact, lots of features, flip phone
Good pictures
Very cheap and very quiet
Speedy Printing, easy to use, price
Cheap, Quite good picture quality, Extremely easy to use
Photo quality, color, easy-to-use, features... and so on.
Versatile, easy to use
Easy to use
Looks good on the outside
no flash  amp; you lose all your pix if the battery goez dead .
Battery, some design issues, TDMA technology
Bring anywhere, cute (people love it), fast (with small memory card) in bright light.
Exhaust batteries too fast, time to reset for next shot, will let you take shots without enough light and not tell you
Photos use a lot of ink, somewhat noisy, not the fastest
Low price. Fast. Quiet. Good quality prints.
Power button, minor software glitches, needs a bit more earpiece volume
Bulky, lag time in keys, 20 digit max entries in phonebook, antenna, no infrared
Nothing important
EXPENSIVE $500,Battery life is very short  plus accesories $170
compact, photo  quality, quiet
Large size, No ink level monitors
Battery life, charging problems, low earpiece sound
Low quality, washed out color, pricey
poor image quality, flash that thinks it's  amp;quot;intelligent, amp;quot; awkward to handle.
Great features, easy to use, great look.
Price, Quality of Print, Design, Ease of Use
Small/light weight.  , Easy transfer.  , Battery charger saves a bundle!
Very basic features
Fast, Sleek, Compact, Top Quality
Nice form-factor, Long battery life, Good reception, Lots of accessories
will not stay closed, extra work needed to position (optional) car seat for newborns
100 pages a day with no problem, CHEAP, FAST, INCREDIBLE deal!
great photos, tons of options, good battery, records on cd!
f2.8 lens, Olympus should'va kept the f2 lens
many pros.,wheels,both babies can lie down,play with each other and more.
lightweight, good battery life, good clarity, stylish, easy to use, affordable
Not a very 'solid' feel, but of course this is nit-picking
image storage speed (slow), autofocus speed (slow)
Does not come with AC Adapter
small, convenient, easy to use
Excellent voice quality, construction, and function.
You'll love the features!
Excellent integration of phone, internet, email.  Very stylish
You can mix your own ringtones. Good coverage, and rock solid.
none i love it
picture quality, cheap price
Economical rate plan
Polyphonic Ring Tones, Color Screen, E-Mail Capabilities
$450 price tag
Paper mis-feeds paper occasionally
Inexpensive digital zoom that stores on a floppy
Smaller phone with all the features
great phone overall
The car seat can't be beat
fashionable,cute,beautiful ring
none
Many great features for such a low price
Annoying paper jams.
See above
Basket is hard to reach when car seat is attached
Got brushed off and played phone tag with many people @ Fujifilm usa
Cheap, small, lots of features.
Price, Ink Cartridges are more expensive
Quick, Easy, Great Pictures, No Film to Develop
Ease of use, quality of photos
A lot of features.  Quality printing.
Size and weight - no need for carrying clip etc. fits in front pocket.
So many GREAT features I can't get to them all!
Setup could be easier, Software not up to date, Color pictures take about a minute to print
Inexpensive and stylish
expensive
None
cheap
Great picture quality, features, uses Memory Stick, records movies, includes charger and batteries.
Prints Slow In Best Quality Mode, No Feeder Tray For Faxing, USB Cable Not Included
durability and reception
Small, easy to use, High resolution, great quality, many formats
10X optical image stabilized zoom.  Simple to use.
Quality is horrible
Lightweight, very manoeuvrable, tough, no rust after two years!
A good value for the price. No cons.
price effective,very inexpensive
autofocus in low lite situations, red eye reduction not optimal,better picture organizing software needed
Tons of great features, small size, light weight
Can't control back light time on. #13; #10;Oval cursor TOO recessed for easy operation.
Camera, ringtones, user-friendly
Nothing!  (Except that paper-catcher thing)
inexpensive; nice built in features; computer friendly out of the box
design and picture quality
battery and phone book
Hands free speaker phone
ZOOOOOOOMM!!!, Lots of manual options.
read on and i'll tell you
none
Inexpensive Digital Pictures
Excellent resolution, good speed, great features
EXCELLENT RESULTS, easy to use,
compact size, good picture quality
For my use there are very few - close-ups only 20 cm
Ethernet capable, fast, high resolution output
low number of pages printed per minute
very well packed (snicker)
Inexpensive photos,  rugged body,
none
Ease of operation
Great SLR features  amp; unparalelled zoom
Prints great, no paper jams, compact size and design, easy to use
Proprietary battery and storage; Lens cap is not very user-friendly
Excellent ease of use, fast printing and a sleek easy to use design.
Great quality output, quiet
Lackluster mediocrity, poorly thought through design.
Impressive quality at an economic price.
no zoom, no brace.....
Battery Life
print speed
Sturdy
Weak flash, delay between shots, 2x zoom
Expensive, auto sensor sometimes not reliable
nice size and 'fit' in the hand
Excellent Camera
Extremely Portable amp;#13; amp;#10;Great image quality to camera size ratio amp;#13; amp;#10;
Looks nice
No Macro Function
5 MB memory, plays mp3 and midi, picture ID
None
nice price, easy interface, many features
No speakerphone
Amazing quality, USB interface, large memory card included
Oblong and awkward shape
none for what I wanted, but the reception is not as good as my 8500.
LQ quality, bluetooth, 1.3 megapixel camera, nice sound
Ease of use, image quality, compact convenient design
AA batteries, Compact Flash media, LCD screen, auto focus
Easy to use with good results
Inordinate long period of time for the camera to save a picture.
Nice menus, great view screen
8MB memory stick, memory stick in general.
Slow, Limited Ink Reserve
good screen, speakerphone, ringtone speaker is clear.  Has a good camers
Sleek Styling, Memory
No color screen, Not tri-band
comes in those see through colors if you want
Compact, great picture quality, lots of options, raw format available
Delay between shots, eats batteries like popcorn
Reasonable price, practical features, compact size and external display
easy to use, great screen-brightness, simple keypad, loud ringer,  very light and compact, flashy appearance
Very small, sturdy, and feature filled
small, compact, light-weight, easy to install
Poor night time performance
Well built; economical; good output.
A bit hard to load more than a dozen sheets of paper.
No USB or Parallel cord provided.
Supplied 16MB Memory Stick a joke, no sticks available above 128MB yet
Doesn't scan 4X6 color prints very well.
Had to replace once, nothing else. This phone is excellent.
Warmup period, slow, expensive ink, ink runs out quick
Long time to take picture
Small size, fits in my hand, LCD viewfinder, easy for a first-timer to use
Compact and portable, takes vivid and brilliant color photographs
Small, Sleek, Lots of Features, and Lots of Extra's
Color output great, easy to use, installs in minutes
Ringtone Options, Picture Integration
great picture quality, easy to use
Battery life, a bit complicated to program
Cost of color printing per page can add up quickly, like all inkjets though.
No Speaker Phone, Earpiece not included in the package.
None
Good Quality pictures
Seems to be a crapshoot whether they work.
Compact, Color, Quality
Small, lightweight
Some neutered features, small navigation issues, and poor external display planning.
Easy to use.  Easy to upload to Mac.
with internal antenna the reception isn't as good as other models!
Best print Quality Known to Man!
Dial pad takes a while to adjust to, not many accessories are available (yet.
None, other than size of camera. amp;#13; amp;#10;
Separate ink tanks, USB or serial connectivity, good software to go with it.
Great features, nice feel, Voice activation, Bluetooth
useless small CF card included, access time slower with larger card
easy to use.
poor camera quality, few ringtones or games, soft speakerphone
Pricey, Poor Manual and Poorly Designed Lens Cap
Frustratingly short battery life, minor Sonyeric functionality limitations, smallish memory and camera, no EDGE
cost
Small size, great photos.
Size, power, attitude
Quick printing, good color, shows ink levels
It's an HP
Great pictures, corrects red eye problem in Coolpix2500, compact and stores loads of pictures
So easy to use, I didn't need the manual.
Size, shape, organizer, tech-support, Verizon service.
too slow.
Offers superb printy quality
No cable and web-connectivity from SprintPCS, over three-months now.
zoom, rapid shoots
It's an all in one.
Durable-dropped it at least 23 times and still kicking, small
Small included memory stick, can take some time to get used.
A little more pricey than some printers, but well worth it.
Unlimited features and light as a feather.
Great copies, Quiet, solid, reliable, good technical support.
its higher in space needed
Easy to use, pretty good photos, USB, excellent value
None
Quiet, Fast, Compact, Individual Color Ink Cartridges.
Easy to use, floppies make for easy transfer, takes abuse well
easy, nice prints, reprints, email
master of none
the memory stick that comes with it is too small
Stylish, small, large LCD.
8MB memory too small and lens cap strap wasn't include
Nice looks, plenty functions.
Wait for disk recording. Less than stellar video.  Beware non-Sony CD-RWs.
FRAGILE antenna, poor ergonomics, phonebook, user interface, weak vibrate
Inexpensive.
2.1 megapixels, long 6x zoom, macro setting, adjustable resolution, small, lightweight
stylish, has a camera, bluetooth enabled
Durability, sound quality, speaker phone quality.
No outer display
Slick, small, easy to carry, operates oversea
Feature packed phone that does just about everything imaginable.
Hard to find accessories, could have shipped with better battery.
Still confused on how to write back using ping pong messaging
Lack of Windows2000 Drivers, No Zoom
Wireless data modem, bright clear display, nice loud ringers
Combi Customer Service is an answering machine.  Product is not durable.
Paper Expense, Noise
Keep another set of batteries close by...
battery life, one name/one number in phone book
Who wants to do all that stuff? It's way to complicated.
too many to list
Great Pictures, good price, good size, metal case, compact flash
Removable diskette and quick charge battery
Lots of photos, easy to use, cheap!
No external battery charger.
Great camera for the price and size!
Ink cartridges don't last long, frequent glitches in the print jobs
bulky, heavy; battery life
Easy to use, takes great pictures, lots of options.
should have bought it sooner
Short battery life, hard to see screen in daylight.
bulky
Even more spiffy features! amp;#13; amp;#10;
camera doesnt not take good pictures at all
Pocket size, great outdoor pics, rechargeable battery
cartridges
Quality printing,easy to use,affordable ink
Frequent Battery Charging
slow
No auto-answer unless using car kit, alert beeps are watch-like and easy to miss.
Flash produces red-eye, Included memory stick is inadequate
inexpensive, fun to play with.
Its small and reliable, it will fit on any desktop.
No Back-light at night.
The ink cartridges could hold a bit more.
cheap, small large capacity, user-friendly.
Price, icons on LCD screen are small, small 8mb flashcard, bought $200  accessories
Just the right amount of features, removable floppy
4096 colors, MMS no sound, 4 chord ringtones , no built-in camera, pop-port, SLOW!
Works great when outside.
Only USB connection to computer.
Accessories hard to find and still somewhat expensive.
power button placement, other than that, nothing!
Good picture quality, battery life, MPEG movie mode, easy to use, swivel LCD
Great feel, easy to operate, 12 second video capture mode, good battery life.
Nice size, nice picture quality.
Size makes a good fit in a lot of places,Works well with other accessories,Replacing ink is easy,Good price.
Expensive...
SUCKS,SUCKS, SUCKS!!!!!!!!!
many problems, print quality not great
Pricey accessories. No standard headphone jack.
no side buttons, a little thick
NONE!!!
high price
sleek
Listed in review
Ease of use, color view screen
none really
lt;b gt; lt;i gt;A bit on the heavy side; not great macro settings; poor lens cap design. lt;/b gt; lt;/i gt;
Inexpensive to buy; inexpensive non-epson cartridges available; simple to operate.
Talk/Standby time less than optimal
poor reception
Relatively small, lens cover, low lag time between photos
Pocket-sized
Good image quality, quality construction.
none
Good Printing Speed / Excellent Quality / Solid Construction / Easy Set-Up
Good picture quality , great features. Easy to use. Excellent optical zoom. Records video w/audio.
some nice extra features, excellent reception, phonebook organized well, voice memo
Small size, clarity, appearance, big buttons, fairly simple menus, lightweight, voice dialing
One of the most expensive inkjet printers
What's up with 32MB supplied memory??
Strong music player, impressive multimedia features, good volume/speakerphones.
poor quality pics, very slow
Easy to transfer to computer; great to e-mail and share pictures; Battery
A Bit Bulky
Can't use half the features thanks to The Interface From Hell. Antenna makes shoulder-holders shrug.
Easy to use and lightweight
Easy and smooth 3 position recline.  Plush fabric. Very lightweight and easy fold. Good maneuverability.
image quality
No network port. No color. No cable in box
pictures taken in Sunshine are worthless because of severe washout
Excellent display(s).
it's not a photograph
Light, small, sharp, easy to use, flexible manual controls
Inexpensive, easy to use, compact
No speaker phone. Fear it will be outdated quickly as other manufacturers try and copy.
prints out fast, color, black and white, photo-like pictures, easy to use
if you are looking for a professional quality than this isn't recommended
Battery life
- Small, lightweight, - Great battery, quick recharge,
Expensive
slow, response time is slow
Poor performance, doesn't recognize Mac OS 9.04
doesn't handle cardstock or thicker envelopes well
it prints pretty slowly
HP Quality
Difficult On/off switch, short backlight duration, poor reception (service-related?), low memory, unimpressive polyphonic sound .
Power button somewhat hard to get at, need to pay attention to not covering speaker
Thickness of the phone, lacks speaker phone, No PCS "Vision" capabilities (can't send/receive pictures).
Price, Ease of Use, Great Software package, factory support
the price,does not fully recline
Lightweight, small, great webcam
large unit, costly ($2500)
Pricey - 32MB Memory Stick - What's up with that silver body color
Bluetooth compatible, able to get ringtones easily, and small but tough.
Powerful camera, low cost, impressive picture results
Quality
Reliable, compact, inexpensive
slow computer = slow uploading of images
paper feed annoying
Sometimes Locks Up!!!
Lense Limits and Blurring effect inside
Easy to use, good quality picture, zoom
LCD screen eats batteries. Included memory card is small.
Movie mode just ok
Big screen for a cell, good battery life, clear display, expandable memory, bluetooth.
Poor antenna design, charger jack wears out quickly.
Best lenses, lots of battery, easy use, amp;#13; amp;#10;good for the price. amp;#13; amp;#10;
It faxes, scans, copies, and prints like a dream!
great Nokia UI, tiny size, nice design, internal antenna
Short battery life and feels just a bit fragile
Brutal Menu System
Image quality, Functionality, Design
noise in low light situations, doesn't remember flash setting, poor warranty and customer service
Excellent quality print, very good accompanying software,  ease of use
sometimes feeds more than one sheet of paper
4 pixels with many accessories give more shooting options
slightly awkward to talk on, covers sometimes get lose over time
nothing
Small, lightweight, includes good software
Small size and Calender with reminder option features are great,
- 2.1 megapixel resolution  - Wide array of features and options that are relatively easy to use
The 270C has everything you need in a cellular phone and more.
shutter lag, poor focusing, small media capacity
Great Pictures, Small
FAST PRINTING - GREAT PRICE
A little heavier than I would want but not too heavy
Easy to read screen, can change face plates
Don't be lazy, read the review.
decent price, decent pictures
none
Hmm well does not break when falls
High Cost Per Page, Expensive Ink
NOT MAC COMPATIBLE (except OSX)
bad battery life, non-intuitive menus, no search in phonebook, rings not loud
Battery Level, Small buttons
Fragile-Looking, Not Fully MODable.
LCD, 1.3 MP, Auto Everything, Great build quality!
more durable than most umbrella strollers, fully washable, comfortable for kids, fairly priced.
improvements over previous models, speed, quality, low level of noise
Small, cute, internet access, i-tap
easy to use, several features, AA battery operated
Wonderful stroller, easy to use, easy to steer and lasts for the long haul
None found yet
poor battery life
Pixels are obvious
Battery life, phone book not alphabetized, no clock.
cheap
Batteries go a little fast. Bring along 2 or 3 sets of rechargables
Minor focusing niggles (doesn't greatly affect use of the camera); a bit slow perhaps.
Tri-mode wide coverage, voice memos  dialing, low price, sharp resolution  design, light weight
FAST,CLEAR
None
Awful Phone
Speakerphone is very sensitive, sometimes hard to hear.
sucks
Prints beautiful pictures, excellent performance.
High style, color screen, FM radio, speakerphone, polyphonic ring tones
Good quality for b/w
Good quality photos, easy to use, ideal for the beginner
This printer is a great starter printer.
Still a bit bulky and reception goes in and out and no expandability.
Small and stylish. Rich in features.
Small, lightweight, easy installation, inexpensive
No color display, gets hot
Slow shutter reaction.  Serial port image transfer. No shutter speed control.
Clarity
Learning curve
Runs through ink fairly quickly
Sub-par vibration mode, confusing menus and lack of ringing choices
Unacceptable lag times, POOR CUSTOMER SERVICE!!!! Unwilling to stand by product
So many features, huge colorful screen
Photo shop quality pictures produced in less than 1 minute., Easy set up,
battery hog, supplied card not big enough
Functional features, speaker, voice activation, pretty and legible blue screen.
double-sided printing, ease of use, low printer fluid warning light
great picture quality, 6 color inks, border free printing
nothing really bad to say about it
Infra-red, Color screen, Polyphonic ringtones,GPRS
fun, easy to use
Low cost, ease of software use, compact
Had a little difficulty with supplied connection software. Delay of actual click/shoot is long.
Great Quality, Rotating Head, Lot's of features
Obtrusive Antenna, Small buttons,
excellent picture quality, light weight, cheap ink, quiet.
NO Alarm Clock feature, keypad volume is not loud enough even at maximum
Loaded with features, easy to find accessories.  Camera available.
Sharp images, high quality finish, good price
Higher priced
Compact as a palm, well priced, good sound quality
speed, ink
Not always readibly accessible when on train going to office and returning home.
Cheap
easy to use
Slim profile, small size, well constructed, bright screen and good audio quality.
Excellent features for the price. A very good value camera.
excellent picture quality
light weight,and priced right
Great details and amazing colours.
Poor night and lowlight pictures.
Easy to fold, lightweight, lots of cup holder, front feeder tray, big basket
Easy to use, price, pic quality
complicated
Ease of Use, compact, and most importantly, inexpensive
No clock, who cares, get a watch!
numerous generic accessories available, tones available for download from the web
lots of technical problems
Horrible printer
Great pictures, has features usually found on more expensive cameras
Verizon Disabled Features
Inexpensive/Fairly easy to operate/Informative help on-line
Poor quality, lousy battery life, malfunctions.
Battery Life, made out of poor plastic , can not play internet games on this.
adequate print quality
Amazing quality of pictures
Smaller than most other Nextel phones, voice activated dialing, nifty blue backlighting
slow printing, so so print quality
You don't have to be plugged into the computer to take pictures
Horrible car kit, drops calls, people can't hear me.
No OEM installed hands-free accessory.
built-in camera; nice color display
Small screen, medium battery life
single band, dust
Excellent picture quality, sturdy, simple, good options, good customer support
you must push a series of buttons to get flash
limited memory
Fabulous for the price and great in its day.
Fantastic reception; very long battery life; feature packed; speakerphone; easy to use intuitive menu.
High quality pictures, inexpensive, bright LCD
Amazing range of options, good image quality
Problems with direct hookup to computer
Excellent Quality when it works and many features, Great pictures and voice clarity
None yet
Great Color  amp;amp; Printing
Paint flakes off faceplate...carrying cradle does not securely hold phone
Price, print quality, ease of use
price, size, use as webcam
no fun ring tones, a little heavy
Low price, easy setup, works well with Mac OS 10.2
good print quality for the price
Poor battery life, slow response, complex menus
Short-life battery, Not durable, Lousy ringtones   lots more
bulky
Two-way messaging, great clarity
Very User Friendly, Lightweight, yet durable  amp;amp; excellent picture quality.
Size, Price, Voice Dialing, Use Everywhere
High Quality Photo Printing at an affordable price
size
Antennae breaks easily
Expensive ink cartridges.
Sometimes light spots on photos
Reliable, fairly easy to use.
expensive ink cartridges, no cables included
Everything Else!!!.....Poor quality of manufacturing and software design.
The Phone is Small and has a Short Battery Life.
Doesn't print extremely fast, although it isn't slow either.
Great Quality, Print Cartridges Last A LONG Time
Easy to use.  Good quality still photos with various options in-camera.
Ink is a little expensive
Great style   design for an older phone.
Polaroid PDC640 is a great first digital camera.
none
doesn't work all the time,
No serial connector.
does work w/ WIN XP
Bait and Switch Strategies by CAMERA ZONE, CAMERA SOUND, COMPDIRECT and DISCOVERY CAMERA
Great color screen, short charging time, excellent sounds
clear, small, lightweight
Easy to use
Interface is HORRIBLE
Not as fast as I would like
Excellent print quality and ease of use.
Underpowered flash, poor focusing, short battery life.
functions and clarity
Think of it as a Nokia 8260 on a party custume. Great reception.
easy of use, great pictures, lots of features, the list goes on
Price of cartridges
cheap, cheap, cheap. Excellent text and photo quality prints.
Eats batteries  amp;amp; lacks USB port
small, easy to use, astheticly pleasing, multi-functions
Cannot handle paper well.
Expensive accessories
Amazing features, photos, and convenience.
very good
Uses ink too quickly, cost of ink cartridges
price, quality
limited amount of pictures can be taken
Great pictures, oots of possibilities
No flash, small memory, and variable picture quality
Not any more
high cost
battery life less than expected
Not that great for things other than texting
THE PRICE!, very bulky, the battery life and the 640 x 480 resolution.
battery life
I can take a ton of high res pictures on 1 cd
Good, reasonable, compact, no problems with Windows 2000 Professional
Battery Time, Heat After Long Use, Reception, Screen Picks up Grime
Fast print speeds, average cost of consumables, and USB support
Compact, inexpensive, reliable, easy to find ink tanks
FAST, RELIABLE, EASE-OF-USE,  amp; INK CARTRIDGES LAST A LONG TIME!
Having to buy mouthly cards to charge it
It prints fast and produces some nice photo prints!
bad placement of the status light
the pictures look spectacular
Hard to configure; high learning curve.
Poor quality pictures
pocket sized.
Breaks when dropped on ceramic tiles
Good sound, reception, and battery life, great screen, broadband, speakerphone large phone book, transflash
Kind of big.
Buttons rattle a bit, only available through Cingular so AT T customers are out of luck
Excellent camera
Picture quality less than film-perfect.  Remember, though-it's a WATCH, for goodness sake.
Product has the features I want
bulky
way ahead of the competition - this is practically a Digital SLR!
Not many choices feature wise
Not a Postscript printer
lightweight, easy to use,
Stylish and sexy.  Great list of features. Beautiful metal casing.
solid build, elegant design, sharp pictures, very portable
affordable, easy setup
Small, light, handsome, good reception and battery life.
Big screen, QWERTY keyboard, Multimedia capabilities
Combo keypad/action button horrible, few useful features
Marketing
Carl Zeiss lens, clear sharp photos
None.
Phone Book, Backlit, Vibrating
Beautiful screen.
The phone to own!
Uses batteries quickly.
no film, digital display, flash, good pictures, fun to use, TV and computer compatible
Good looking, large ink cartridges
Wonderful functionality
Great photos from this printer
costly to run, printhead died 1 month after warranty
Learning curve is pretty steep.   It eats batteries for breakfast.
battery life, reception
Antenna breaks easily. Operating System is flaky. Poor reception. Phone directory searching sucks.
small, lightweight, luminated keypad
Converges phone and PDA - no more carrying two devices, speakerphone, excellent sound quality.
VERY easy to use. Just enough features. Good for a first cell phone.
Cool factor, versatile, only one device to carry
Size IS everything. Forget clunkers. This goes with you everywhere.
Prints documents fast
Weak vibrate, flash, long antenna stub, Transflash format
Awesome picture quality, excellent features, light, small
Very sharp lens and chip Compact Excellent software
only 9 ring styles, no games (like nokia)
Serial Cable has slow transfer speeds
Fast, high-quality printer that lasts and lasts...
Takes great pictures
Short battery life. USB problems with NT, Storage Space amp;#13; amp;#10;
Uses too much ink
Many seemingly nifty features
Higher purchase price
Cheap, will get the job done
Wakes the neighbors when you turn it on
seat cover is removable,dark colors,basket underneath,
Short lifespan
size without extra battery
LIGHTWEIGHT, easy to get in and out of trunk, narrow
The Video feature... and Rechargable Batteries are a must for this camera.
Cost and quality
functional,easy to use
No Bluetooth
Quality, USB connection, Ink Supply
There are smaller cameras now.  Flash slow to warm up
Decent image quality.  VERY tiny and really is "pocketable".
No color display, games are a little boring
Pictures not as clear as I have seen from other cameras.
Looks sharp nice display lots of features
photo quality, ink lasts longer, great software included
JAVA, Battery Life, Voice notes, Speaker phone, quick charge time
may not be the best for intricate graphics
Still cost too much! Wish prices would come down.
All in one, great price for so much stuff
Built well, takes great pics, easy to use, a lot of options, instructions are easy to under stand and great internet support by Olympus on answering questions.
Size, features, reception, style
Small, Loaded with features, easy to use, fun to play with
service, price
amp;quot;instant amp;quot; web shots, great lens, convenient floppies
Nice Pictures, Small, Easy to Use
you will need extras, and lots of batteris
Cheap, Actually takes pictures.
high ink Cost.
good clear pictures, good color prints
too many
Cheap
Poor battery performance
- none
not cheap
Better software is available than what is supplied.
Easy to use
Hp ink is not inexpensive.  :(
None
It's very lightweight and it might be easy to damage it.
pics;video;testing;extra service numbers
Ease of use, importability of pictures into most any system
Color ink is a bit pricey, replacing the print head is a major upkeep expense.
Tremendous features, cheap accessories
If you print photos, ink runs out quickly.  Hi-res printing is slow.
light, cheap, reliable
lightweight, easy use
Great price
Antenna sticks out a bit when on your belt.
Photo Quality Prints, Duplex Printing, Clear Text Printing
Comfort
Small, cool silver color, external display, awesome blue backlight
short grip necessitates optional battery pack and extended grip for big hands. Exposed LCD.
poor ringer volume, poor signal strength, poor camera, poor ringer and game selection
Multiple functions, software bundle
great pictures, no connection needed to download, saves to disk
Wonderful images, high speed, and easy to use!
Cheap
awesome picture quality, 6x optical zoom, video mode, manual controls
Very light weight, useful features, excellent quality.
single sheet feeding sometimes a problem
Has a good feel to it.Good pics at med  amp; above resolutions
Good software bundle and rebates.  Easy to setup.  Very very cheap.
poor images
Very Expensive Ink Cartilage, Very Slow
Controls, swivel lens can be either useful or obnoxious, can be hard on batteries
Quality Images, Lots of Features,
No web services yet
Pretty big for trunk, squeaky wheels
none
Unreliable; Doesnt sync calender/phone/mail with computer
Small basket
colorful features, extra large font, alarm/w/timer and email feature.
Too large and heavy for travel
my finger gets in the pic frame, no carry bag
Very small and lightweight - great reception
Very cool phone, stylish and superb features.
blackest blacks - deepest true colors, non smearing/fading ink, does not clog or dry up, fast printer, outstanding image quality
Signal is so poor, gives me a headache
lens cap, battery life, a little big
No onscreen display of cartridge usage, so you know when you're getting low.
Amazing Picture Resolution, Long Battery life (2AA), Great options, Low Price
Software supplied does not seem very good
battery life, slow picture transfer
None.
Not very durable, slow, ink cartridges are too small
Battery life extremely short
many helpful (but not necessary) accessories not included
Great prints
Easy to hold, no motion while taking picture. Large font on menu  amp; LED
exceptionally easy to use, accessories are easy to find
Larger than flip style
Eats up batteries!, Not expandable. Kodak does not have any attachable lenses for this camera
Small, low battery use, flash, macro mode, 60 to 90 photo capacity, good software.
ink does not last long
Boxy design, Not 100% consistent photos
Easy to read display, lots of interesting features,
Attempt at using refill inks was disasterous. Printhead replacement very expensive oustside warranty period.
poor reception, unreliable, poorly made.
Great Images, Optical Zoom, Good features
Endless paper jams
I'll let you know if I find one!!
Roomy for child and reclines to different positions.  Folds to convenient size.
Kinda bulky. Needs larger memory stick. No view finder, just LED dislay.
Price
easy to use. tiny. audio recorder, MP3 player, camera, and movie recorder in one device.
Takes good photos of dead rats.
cant print high quality  true to life pictures
none
easy to use, basic features, text messaging, free phone
Flimsy?
Quality color picures.
It's very portable and small
so many functions that all work great
Sound quality is excellent, user interface is friendly, graphics are top notch, great camera!
Lots of features for a relatively good price. Better signal strength with decent battery life.
Poorly stocked supplies, USB only, banding and visible dots on very close inspection.
AF misses sometimes at 4x in macro regime
Picture quality, takes Microdrive, feature rich
adequate printing speed, good print quality, economical
Software froze once
Good phone at a Great Price that can be upgraded via software.
Expensive faces and that is about it.
Speed, quality
Six Color Ink, New Sleek Design,  Borderless printing.  Works with OSX.
Lack of ringer volume control and vibrate option, bulk
poor image quality
Chronic battery issues with this model
No instruction manual, changing ink cartridge is tricky, text is not sharp
Exposure delay
Small size and price, takes decent daytime pics for emailing.
Great price, seems to handle paper well, good quality output.
It is a bit larger than some phones
Can be inconvenient when set on combination vibration and tone.
Long battery life, easy to use, tiny, and a nice blue light
None
photo printing issues--colors not always good
None worth highlighting.
free gift from gateway
Cute little blue camera
Doesn't meet everyone's budget for a printer.
stylish, nice features, easy to read screen, custom settings
Easy to use, economical on battery-power.
Easy to use,  Readily available film, Great viewer, ability to take MPEGs,  durable
really small
Light weight phone with a vivid color display and it's easy to use.
Palm PDA and cellphone in one
-Software is a little slow, software version .03 is supposed to fix this.
small size; great battery life; sturdy construction; stylish; menus are intuitive
Menu system can be a bit confusing, only comes with 8 megs of flash.
lightweight, versatile, attractive, slim, tons of features
Features, Usability
fast, compact, east to load/unload ink
eats batteries. small CF card
Great for basic features, good text messaging
Runs through batteries very fast, annoying delay in taking pictures
large paper tray, fast and crisp output
No optical zoom, no USB support for Windows 95, large investment for a first camera
Light duty construction.
Maybe the cost for the poor rug rats.
Free, Works good
Easy usage
Style.  Voice dialing.  Easy to set silent mode.  Compact design.  Good battery.
Mediocre interface, lacks new features
Can't be used with Windows 2000
clip that holds stroller closed is tough.
Bells and whistles galore, easy to use, quality product, convenient
none
Bulky, no outside display, ugly green backlight, no features, bad ringers, cannot download
Small size, GREAT battery life, built-in vibrate function, dual illumination, intuitive memory approach.
doesn't print color
expensive non-standard accessories, battery life, signal strength, steep learning curve.
Size, flexible batteries
it does what it was made to do: call and get calls
Manual needs some improvement.
Low price, doubles up as digicam card reader, can print without computer
Fabric is durable, stroller is lightweight and folds nicely
Price, quality, ease of use
poorly designed; breaks too easily;
big phonebook, light-weight, good amount of features
Lens cover appears flimsy.
Size  amp; Technology
Just a bit bulky, hard to find volume on side without looking
Can't think of any
Gorgeous, tiny, reliable
no vibrate, Short battery life.
Small Compact Versatile Cell
micro sd card under battery door. Learning to transfer files a bit complicated.
Good old Nokia menus and features
Phonebook, some of the default settings (explained in my review)
Eats batteries, small LCD screen, eats batteries, slightly heavy.
Reliable, compact, stylish, multiple really useful features...
minor issues regarding paperhandling with thick paper.
eats batteries for breakfast, must have rechargable ones
not very big
Really great colors and crisp pictures.
Failure to recognize paper in the tray.
lots of pages per minute with windows 2000
A simple phone i nicknamed "The Tank". Inexpensive and Extremely intuitive
battery life,massive storage.
Short Life Span, Many Future Problems, High Repair Costs, High Sticker Price, Few Extra Features
Its slow and produces very low quality.
first-generation bugs, expensive
No antenna which means unclear calls
None found yet
Only 4mb of memory amp;#13; amp;#10;Lcd Screen Hard to Clean amp;#13; amp;#10;Slow Shutter Speed
A little bulky
Lite and easy to carry. Handy to have along
Acts as PDA, easy to read screen, predictive typing, Othello/Reversi game, voice dialing
Small LCD, underpowered, NIMH extra
lack of a LCD
Easy to use/Battery life/camera and video.
easy to use
Not ideal for travel...probably isn't meant to be
poor battery life, dropped calls, volume fluctuates without the users' control
Shutter speed between shots.  Not an action camera
Some durability issues
Faceplates aren't easily changable
Not very loud, not always as clear as other phones.
Seems to get a lot of red-eye
Picture quality is bad
Compact,nice color display, durable.
Great quality, price plus it is easy to use and hookup.
Wheels are positioned narrowly, recline isn't much
Good picture quality, excellent computer software, a lot of options
Not for high resolution photography.
Can't record videos
laser fax is cheaper, fair quality, flatbed fax
Can hit the lock key without knowing it
Easy to use and install, good quality.
LCD too small and hard to navigate.
can't hold a lot of paper
Durable, sleek
Good Reception, Very Durable, Blue Lighted Screen and Number Pad.
Blotchy colors, super grainy above 100ISO, grinding lens, slow
photo is a bit lack luster
PC Sync is somehow hard to use, no expansion port, fingerprints easily,
High cost per page, may be overtaken by newer printers
Pretty decent with quality of graphics
A little tricky to set up.
If you want to spend more, you can get more resolution and memory.
Nikon quality Lens,  many features
Very  Hard to Use
expensive for the moment (The netherlands)
Great pictures!
fast, good quality, quiet, efficient
none
Small, deceptively sturdy, intuitive menus, great reception
Very user friendly, even for novice; excellent color and contrast, even in natural light
no cover, no zoom lens, short battery life
Excellent resolution and color, very user friendly, very little shutter lag.
incredible output
The low price makes it very convent
quality, resolution, storage, instant viewing
Loud start-up, somewhat noisy
Inexpensive  amp; compact amp;#13; amp;#10;Good color quality amp;#13; amp;#10;Quiet
Too large to wear comfortably, static
Short battery life, long time to charge, battery gets hot.
small, sleek stylish, features
Battery life is horrible!
Noisy
Great screen, nice keyboard, Symbian O/S, lots of memory and expansion possibilities.
short battery life
Battery life is very short
5MP, F/1.8 lens, hot shoe, Compact Flash, AA batteries, great value.
Dismal battery life, images too soft, poor CCD sensitivity, no RAW export
Decent battery, vibrate, faceplates, lots of ringtones, small.
great price, great value, great product
LCD SCREEN DOES NOT WORK AFTER A FEW MONTHS!
Low optical zoom; flimsy feel; poor LCD; unreliable; poor viewfinder
short battery life, poor resolution, no amp;#13; amp;#10;customer service, badly constructed
Inexpensive and Compact
Beautiful pictures, economical, a company that I trust
feel of buttons, battery life, ability to hear other party.
Battery only lasts 2 hours
VERY easy to use, quick picture transfer, easy to read menus, high quality display.
easy to use
Great software , easy to use, the best printing I've seen on an inkjet
Slightly Top-Heavy
None. For this price range you can't get anything better.
none
good and cheap
battery life, features, durable
No alphabetical sorted phone list.  Battery Life seems much less than Startac 7768.
Cheapest Flatbed-Scanner-Printer
no optical lens
Shutter release delay can be frustrating.
Costly ink cartridges, so-so printing on plain paper
- Size, - Battery life, - Daytime pictures
have to be very still to take a great picture.
slow battery charging speed
Small
Ease of use, picture quality, convenience and price of file transfer media (floppy disk)
Confusing to use
Beautiful color and vivid detail
Simple to use some good features
Large size
High quality pictures, very economical, many features and great user manual.
Very little memory, won't be enough if you like clicking pictures.
Have to swap out cartridges (black/photo)
Flimsily built and so-so quality
Very light, excellent macro,excellent portrait with scenery background, easy to use
NONE
Cable is separate purchase
3G CDMA - crisp LCD matrix - Lazer Blue LED's! buttons feel cool! Sleek
One-handed folding is a breeze!
Cheap and good text printing
Cheap, Reliable, Accurate, Excellent print quality
Great Picture Quality, ease in use
Nice display, good battery life, reception anywhere, cool voice dial,
Small, stylish, vibrant color display, AWESOME RECEPTION, external display, "voice" keypad sound (makes it unique)
Size, fits anywhere
easy storage on simple floppy
Small, lightweight and excellent photos
Inexpensive.  Good value for the money, IF you don't expect the best.
Expensive ($700) amp;#13; amp;#10;Not as useful if you don't own a home PC amp;#13; amp;#10;
slow to start printing, paper tray drops paper
great color, easy to use
too many confusing buttons
Fantastic pictures, easy to use, small, holds many pics
Advantage of a digital camera, easy to use, floppy disk storage
First Generation Product Still Has Major Flaws
difficult configuration
very poor battery life,displays 'no service' in many areas, fragile
Very hard to "hold" with your shoulder while... cough... driving.
Slow in hi-res color, expensive (but worth it!)
echo, can't tell the time if no reception, barely operates in analog mode
very versatile, many options the 35mm enthusiast will enjoy
Easy to use. Camera and Video camera. Great talk time.
Direct connect, internet capable, download games, voice recording, etc
Not so great for everyone else.
Devours batteries, white out on closeups with flash
Convenient transfer of images to PC; perfect exposures
Great customer service but wish it was toll-free
Small size, user friendly, better reception, ring tones
good size
limited storage on floppy, hard to use in full sun
Fantastic photo prints, and very quiet.
Powerful, precise, easy to use, worth every penny.
Sleek, Stylish, Compact, Lightweight
Size, battery life, use-ability
small, lightweight, easy to use
Can't use personal SMS tones (but can be fixed with software upgrade), Poor MMS support.
Photo ink lasts 75 years
breakdowns lack of warranty back up for known fault. poor volume
cool shape, radio, different face plates, multiple ring tones
None
Higher priced, smallish basket
Too many dropped calls, slow, quiet polyphonic rings, random restarts, 1995 cell phone dependability.
tri-band, good speaker phone, great battery life, nice keys, pleasing sound, bright color screen
everything is easy to use and the funtions are great
no zoom
rather dark optics, a bit slow amp;#13; amp;#10;
Infrared, Surfs the Internet, Functions as a Wireless Modem, Small/Lightweight   Durable design
Battery life
bad quality, poorly made
My carrier disabled the full feature set (OBEX).  "LOCATION" field is missing in the calendar.
Some installation trouble on WinXP, make sure you have internet access to install.
Great quality pics. Very easy to use.  No mistakes
not sturdy, break easily
Battery hog, no lens cap, no USB connection
Battery life, limited data entry for PDA functions.
Price, slow learning curve, placement of sensors.
Cheap, small, fast
digital screen is a little hard to read, paper tray doesn't hold a lot
Ink runs out quickly.
lack of essential accessories, 3x zoom
Great screen and keyboard; Advanced, easy-to-use applications
Antenna is huge -- almost as long as the phone when fully extended.
heavy, not easily cleaned.
Beautiful photos, easy to use, great exposure modes, spot meter!
Bluetooth is good, nice UI
customizable, Portable, durable
Compact, easy to use, packaged software bundle
Cheap with relatively decent image quality
Battery Life, inadequate zoom
Great sound, improved reception, easy to use, very cool, Data capable
Small, Light, Bluetooth, IR, Battery Life, Tri-band
expensive
Should be sold with case
Fast, quiet, and great quality
Charge time is fast, speaker phone
Still lacking a good zoom amp;#13; amp;#10;Digital zoom is still reasonably low quality amp;#13; amp;#10;Weak flash
Painted silver housing.
Well, you get what you pay for...
Pricing, Image Quality, Dimensions, USB-port, CF-slot, Flash, WebCam
QUALITY ISSUES, QUALITY ISSUES, QUALITY ISSUES, QUALITY ISSUES!!!!!!!!!!!!
Train whistle message tone, color animation, ease of use
Easy to shoot with and great pictures; Conveniently priced and tons of features
pay out of your own pocket for long distance tech support.
cheap construction, mediocre JPEG's,poor design,poor LCD
HP Quality
Easy to use, good quality pictures, good video, too.
It is also coming down in price and becoming very affordabl
Buttons are too small
FinePix is right on the money
Annena breaks easy but not needed. Large compare to new flip phones.
None
Durability   small size
- Size, - Looks, - Largest LCD display ever seen, - Image quality, - Portability
Good resolution, and a ton of extra features
Very sleek and small.  LOADS of features!
Small size, great quality, accepts AA batteries.
The quality of the images!
Screen, ringer volume, clarity, coverage, ringer tones, antenna
Need to use a bidirectional parallel interface instead of usb or some utilities will not function.
headphone adapter easily lost, no headphones, no music software, quirky touch sensitive panels, no flash
horible picutre quality
Perfect conversation starter, great viewscreen, easy to use, lightweight, Cool Factor, 12MB native memory, Movies!
Expensive
cheap ink, good speed and resolution
Full Featured - Easy to Use!
Excellent picture quality, impressive features.
Great inexpensive printer that delivers unexpectedly good quality print
Superlative Print Quality, quietness, speed, two-sided printing is fab
Web Browsing, easy texting and emailing.
Reception, bright screen, EVDO, speaker phone, 1 megapixel camera, battery life, MP3 support
great quality, fast print speed
Kinda Slow, price
sometimes loss of signals
Price, Over all Performance, Zoom Feature
Picture quality, ease of use, build quality
None
4 Megapixels. Movie mode. Great pictures!
Great price, great photo quality color copies/scans, great value!!
autofocus not reliable, ergonomics, manual features menu, noisy zoom
MANUAL, BATTERY LIFE, AND HOLSTER TENDS TO BE DIFFICULT TO TAKE PHONE OUT.
Not good on rough terrain
Battery Life, Buttons too low profile
A little pricey if you don't plan on printing many pictures
great pictures good price
Color screen, Features, voice dialing, Polyphonic ring tones.
Battery life could be better.
None!
Signal,Features, everything!
easy to aim and fantastic quality images
The USB connection WILL NOT WORK with Window's Millenium Edition.
Size and portability, it also has an excellent battery life.
slightly large and bulky as well as costly, but well worth it
Not true photo quality, Epson ink is expensive
None
cost
Looks nice, works well for a while.
The Phone! No Bluetooth. "Camera"
Light build quality for the cost
Limited battery time
Polaroid reputation, price
standerd charger is slow
Great printer for very few dollars
I got it for cheap, good battery life and good reception.
Easy to use, simple to transfer images to computer
User Friendly in every way
Macro Mode, Detachable Lens Cap
Not flashy.  Not compatible with some old bluetooth gear.
If you are upgrading from i90, it will be a waste of time and money.
Very lightweight, large canopy, cool pattern
Superior handling, comfort, quality
If you are getting this phone for free, it will meet your expectations.
Easy to ues  amp; download,nice screen  amp; zoom, erase unwanted pics
- excellent photo quality - USB and parallel port - Good skin tones
Great idea, Palm OS was an excellent addition
Portability, above average image quality, construction, battery life and LCD
No USB and no optical zoom, not great in low light
may not be the newest or fastest
Good for photos
Zero customer service
hard buttons, slow sms menu, average to poor voice quality
Cheap operating costs, excellent standby mode, good print quality.
Simple enough for any nitwit to set up (myself included)
too big to forget somewhere
Batteries don't last as long as would like
No clock, menus are a pain, no vibrate, consistent dropped calls
the name isn't HP
Slow
kind of small size screen, battery life isnt the greatest
Size, Weight, Picture Quality, Memory Size, USB connection
No more photomats, lightweight, hooks directly to TV for instant images
Only 4 images per disk at highest res
buggy, inconsistent performance
Small size, multiple features
No zoom
High quality pictures, easy to use, FAST
AMAZINGLY poor image quality
Inaudible ringer, poor battery
confusing technical assistance
Light, small, keys covered, many options.
crazy manual. not as pretty as some other phones out there. kinda big.
A bit pricy for some
Prints fast, installs easily, great quality prints, separate color cartridges
scanning problems
poor in low light without flash
None
Battery life seems to suffer unless you remove the battery while not in use.
Incompatible w/ XP laptops, ink problems, poor paper feed, poor support
Walkie-Talkie feature plus speakerphone
Ease of use, floppy disk format
Constant faded LCD's
Pricy for a mass-produced item; Lack of self timer for MPEGs; Location of Zoom switch
Ease of installation, crispness of printing, talking software
size, computer connectivity, focus at distance
Bad indoor reception, battery drain
Prints slow
Cartridges do not last long when printing photos
Too big, heavy and hard to manuver
None that I can think of.
Design, covers, light weight
Speedy, and individual colour cartridges.  Out tray folds up to save space.
Disk Tools on board , ease of operation
Good user interface.
If keypad lock is on and you bump the slide open a little, it unlocks.
Noisy when you first turn it on.  Bad color quality when printing to photo paper!
Light-weight, small, durable, easy to use, stylish
Good for beginners (kids)
Below-average camera, no MP3 player, no way to expand memory
Price, Low Warm Up Time, Support
Reception
Quality of print, speed and dual print trays.
A little too small for my fat fingers, but not a big deal... :~)
Scanner/Copier/Printer, USB and Parallel Port, Good Software, All Around Good Package
Battery life
Nice printing quality
uses batteries quickly
Beautiful Images, Small Package
unusable picture quality, poor battery life, useless speaker phone, quirky features that you can't disable
my 4th canon in 3 years
Cheap, some useful features, phone wraps, good sound quality
Good quality, fast, well made, can get cheap ink.
no camera, kind of chinsy plastic
none
Vibrates, IR capable, Internet ready, clear view screen, clarity of conversation great, Many great features!
Sub-par image quality, no optical zoom, you can get a better camera for less
Quiet, fully featured, great quality prints
compact shape, totally quiet energy saver mode, great text output
Low price, USB connection, 8 mb RAM
Beautiful, affordable photo prints
n/a
Ink doesn't last long...and...You gotta read the manual!
Highest quality prints you will find - better than your photo shop
Long use and stand by time
easy to use
Huge antenna (as opposed to the body) doesn't really deliver huge reception
A pretty good phone with lots of name brand and after market accessories
Slow startup, pictures not always "sharp" as film pictures
A little too awesome
works quickly and quietly
None significant
None yet.
Manual modes difficult for me to learn, power button too close to shutter.
No flash/light, Does not perform in low light.
Bad Quality, Not worth the low pricetag, opt for an HP
interchangeable lenses,great images
Price
Backlight is neat.
Fast, high-quality output at an affordable rate!
Contains a printer, scanner, and color copier all in one machine
It had no color and the buttons were too close together. It had no web.
Bad color reproduction
Easy To Use
excellent photo quality and easy to use
Just wish it has WAP...
Good DSC
Audio clarity is alright; very light and compact.
small, lightweight and easy to carry
Fun, functional and durable.  Doesn't feel like it'll break in your hand.
superb picture quality at 4.0 megapixels, easy to use, small and stylish
lower tray location, foot print
All features i need for everyday communication
Initial memory and charger inadequate, no sound, Pixela software unintelligible.
Durable, easy to use, quality pics, compact flash memory
speed, price
Easy to use, durable, great preview display
terrible phone book if you're used to motorola, bad manual, dropped calls
A "Throw-away Printer! Noise, supply cost, EPSON Lack of 800 number
Speed, Color Quality
cool, sleek design.
Uses lots of ink, a bit noisy, one color ink cartridge rather than individual tanks
my favorite feature is the MP3 player.
Poorly placed buttons, bad phone book, long, expensive accessories
Small and compact size. Leave lots of room on the desk, when space is minimal.
good quality prints
Best of Breed (digital camera + 15 sec MPEGs), Quick for "precious life moments"
Battery, screen, camera, organizer
High Rez, Smart Style and Features
Poor for close-up shots
Lots of manual settings., Love the new "Scene Modes", Well constructed and built,
It Broke!!!
Great design, safe, durable, and comfortable
small and easy to use, Price
I have to install these printers.  They are easy to install.
Easy to use and good text printing
Cheap, great print quality
Didn't work
Reception inside some buildings is difficult.
none
Great picture quality. Excellent low-light performance.  Easy to use.
It's old now.
Antenna way too cheap/flimsy/fragile.
sturdy, stable, easy to collapse, lightweight,
1) Amazing battery life..it runs and runs...
Hasn't found yet.
small footprint, animation poor, navigation could be better
Small and free!
Inexpensive, LCD screen, Flash, CF media slot.
none, so far
Quality feel, user-interface, ease of use, camera quality
Lots of features for the price range.
Slow menu, useless camera, screen poor in sunlight, weak battery life, mediocre reception
Inexpensive
Antenna seems fragile when extended, musical tones aren't "super loud"
careful when cleaning and using dust cover
very sharp photos
Standard interface, sharp color screen, nice features, clarity and good range
Kinda Bulky, EXPENSIVE, ho-hum battery life.
compact
Great picture quality and ease of use.
Very powerful Camera, fairly small construction, 4.1 megapixels!
High quality images, Size, ease of use
Small, Stylish, Cost, Large Phonebook, Feature-packed, Trusted Brand
EVERYTHING
The lens cap setup could be better
small and easy to use
Affordable Laser Printing
Nokia 8210 is high quality, but a little bit expensive.
Very nice output. Quiet. Paper feed works well. Full-duplex.
Software teething pains better, but still not perfect.
Floppy Disk Storage
easy to read screen, lightweight and compact
No Bluetooth
Works Great, Crystal Clear Sound, TONS of options
Very easy to use, no special/expensive equipment/software required
Call volume insufficient in noisy environments; alarm function quit working.
The little rubber plug that you have to lift to plug in the headset.
Bulky, no video camera, texting system
Small Factory Installed Media Stick, Asking price high
not very many features, basic LCD... not color!
Noisy, poor color output, annoying installation
A+ Clarity at top resolutions, many useful and easy settings, easy to learn, 16MB card
prints are not water resistant
Breaks very easily, Can't change faceplates, confusing options menu
large seats, lightweight, easy to push/steer
None yet
More Pixels to Pesos
Battery Power
It talks, most printers don't, scary
Outstanding movie mode; easy out-of-box experience
Low price, excellent customer support, good prints
Short battery life, usability of display outdoors
Sturdy
Digital as vs. Optical zoom, slow download speed using serial cable
Nice and flashy 3.5 amp;quot; disk for film
Inexpensive.  Software is intuitive.
Slow shutter, I could use a longer optical zoom
Looks good
good zoom, good picture quality, cheap, good storage
Small, extremely light, good voice quality, good reception
Only lets you one black cartridge at a time.
None
Voice recording is great.
Instructions almost non existent
Low price
Simple perfection
Lightweight, Voice activated, Small, Long Battery life
Makes me strangely happy.
Will not feed envelopes. Wont grab envelope and sprays ink all over inside of printer.
Screen, Verizon-free downloads, style, quality, features, GPS
Expensive
optical viewfinder can sometimes be misleading
Nice size, cute and pretty, easy to carry, nice color screen
Everything else!!!
Extremely slow when writing to a .tiff
Expensive item relative to its everyday best uses, has silly video and sound add-ons
Small size, great pictures, semi-pro features.
separate cartridges for color/black, cartridges dry up quickly if not used daily.
A great "have-it-with-you-all-the-time" camera!
Very poor battery life
High quality pictures, ease of use, good documentation
rollers leave marcks on paper
Sleek thin design.  Big BRIGHT display - perhaps the best feature of this phone.
Only 1 color (Teal).   #13; #10;Expensive   #13; #10;Speakerphone feature needs work  #13; #10;Voice recognition needs work
10X Zoom, ability to control some manual functions, image quality
10x Zoom lens, Many features
Big for a phone
Doesn't feel like it would survive a fall.
The Display Needs to be Bigger
Tiny
Long battery life, good quality images
Small, stylish, excellent signal reception, attention getter, light, customizable
a bit large, cartridges are expensive, incredibly slow, all colors together
Dual memory slots, adujstable screen, high performance optics, stunning detail.
Ease of hook up! Two buttons to deal with. Comes with great software, cheap price.
No auto focus/lens cover, automatic flash not to my tastes. Lens pops out of focus.
Size, easy of use, charges quickly.
Operation, signal strength, power cord, power consumption.
Slow "boot-up", too much time between pressing shutter button and picture being taken.
Proprietary bluetooth implementation, horrible software/interface design that, lousy signal reception and poor battery life.
Nokia knows how to build solid cellular telephones
low cost
Great contruction and superb results
It copies, scans and faxes
Print quality and speed dramatically improved from our old printer
Low Price, Professional-Looking Documents
Night photography is so-so. May not be very good for advanced users.
Great picture quality, rechargeable batteries last quite a while
Lightweight, easy to use, plenty of flexability in software (organize menu...etc)
could'nt find one
easy to use,best value
Quality of Prints!
Very easy to use with quality pictures.
Lack of easy availability of parts
No LCD.  Menus are less than clear.
Slow color printing. Adding paper was difficult at first.
NONE
Lots of features, sounds like a regular phone, adorable, compact, and fun
small document tray
very good reception i.e. signal strength. Very good battery life
Text browser, ringer bug
Small, color, battery power
Clear high res pictures, easy to use, powerful advanced features
FAST, Excellent quality text and color
Inexpensive printer from a great company
Setting up fax
Slow, poor color resolution, noisy
Easy to use, attractive, small  amp; light.
Small and compact, easy to use, great quality picture, MPEG Movie mode.
Durable,Memory,Low price,decent pic quality.2x zoom
Excellent picture quality. 8MB card included (up to 122 photos); unbelievable price
But try something as simple as attaching a protective UV Filter.
Unbeatable price, high quality output
No flip top
-rotating lens, zoom, varying resolution settings
no flash, manual focus, unreliable
none
Price  amp; Size.
Ringer Can Be Too Loud At Times
Easy to use, excellect picture quality
Can't use it as a modem or transfer ringtones or wallpaper, weak external screen
WAP,Infra-Red,
Amazing camera, very durable, easy to use.
Features for the price
Its a bit costly
Mine was free, lightweight
Size,Menu,Voice Features,Reception,Great Ring Tones
Lightweight, good/great image quality, webcam capability, USB interface
Great colors, features
Cheap, Excellant for the Money, easy to set up and use
External Caller ID Screen
slow compared to some other printers
Terrible technical support; poor customer appreciation.
purple fringe, must stay still for clear pix
print quality deteriorates fast, high price of ink cartridges.
Low Cost, Attractive Design, Easy of Setup, Easy of use
get it now!
Easy, portable, looks great
storage medium, battery life, ease of use
Very small and light, excellent quality, affordable
not as advanced as some
one hand fold shouldn't be a selling point, canopy
handy, nice mp3 player, fun toy
Software sucks
Clear Speaker Phone, PCS Vision Capable, Color Screen, Blue Backlit Keys, Nice Keypad Layout
Not the most stylish. Doesn't have a built-in camera.
Occasionally does not ring on incoming calls.
Cannot download saved names
small, compact and comfortable.  Good reception where I am
Jams on textured papers, limitations with use
not so easy to fold down with attachments, width
It's a little big.
None whatsoever
Great features, flash, LCD display,
Packed with features for the price
Great sound quality, Long Battery Life, Compact design, light.
Low Battery Life, Long Charge Time
Absolutely flakey, secret HP policy reference printhead replacement.
Easy to use, options, foolproof, good price for what you get, decent speed, color, and memory
size, easy to use, good screen
small enough to carry with you
fast printing
Not very good range of clear speech.
use of more expensive lithium ion batteries instead of inexpensive NiMhs
Cheap, simple.
Solid, quiet, dependable, easy setup
BATTERY LIFE :o( ER!
Price, Functions; ease of use
battery life, cheap, motorola, can drop from over 6 feet and wont break
Great reception, well-built (not flimsy), nice big color screens, battery lasts forever.
consumer price
not great resolution, IT BROKE!
Pics blurry when zoomed in too far
Same size as a regular camera, Lightweight, Easy to use
ANTENNA!!!  Somewhat larger than the flip phones, two leather cases both did not work!
won't easily bleed to bottom edge of paper
bigger than the usual stroller
Good Quality Printing, Great Price
Great price, wide format printing
Cost, Speed, Quality, Service
Battery hog, no 'regular' ring, pricey
Great for photo prints
$$$
Some awkward menus, shorter battery life than expected.
Size, weight, polyphonic ringtones
Nice, Compact little camera
If it only works
no Zoom!! price, heavy/bulky,
Clear and Simple
None
Good quality digital photos.  Built-in printer.
Quiet, quick, great printing
Low cost, amazing features, totally configurable, and MUCH more.
high resale value
Buckle difficult to release; basket hard to access when stroller seat is reclined
Ease of use, clear  amp;amp; crisp pictures, LCD
Technical for the first-time camera user, really drains batteries
It all comes out bad.. paper jams are frequent
Minor control, flash and menu shortcomings.
2400x1200 Photo prints on photo paper, multi-function use
Prints great - fast and accurate - prints great pictures.
Fast, excellent connectivity, light on tonner
Expensive, heavy
Poopy Poor Reception quality
Lightweight, cupholders, nice basket, low price, snack tray, can be used with infant carrier/carseat
size, tons of features, good warranty
Small
Excellent battery life, unlimited storage
great zoom
Good quality, easy to use, uses 1.44 floppies
Many good features
The manual
Smaller than any other nextel, Gets same signal for its size.
No fax or auto-feeder
On button is small.
Bulky, hard to carry around
does not screw up; crisp, clear images; good ergonomics
Battery life is terrible! Action shots are no good with this either.
cheap, easy to use
Inexpensive, great LCD resolution, and versatile file saving.
Good price, great zoom, SLR  "feel", good docs, lightweight, easy controls
Great internal LCD; bright and colorful Easy-to-use menus
Resolution, price.
Great  Pictures
cute design, downloadable ringers and wallpaper
Excellent photos, auto mode works great, and has manual override
Must have steady hand
Lack of caller ID features
price, picture quality,
Relatively easy to get working, USB connection handy.
Average battery life. No WAP.
Small screen, interface slightly confusing at first
small, simple, cheap
Started off nice
fairly inexpensive for a flip phone; lots of ringtones included
none
Ease of general use; compact size; good quality pictures for the price
None
Picture's for email and internet were VERY POOR.
Sturdy, Easy to open and close, Convenient
Mine happened to malfunction but the problem was fixed promptly
Expensive ink cartridges, boring look
Price
Good quality black and white.
indoor shots grainy on screen, flash defaults to  amp;quot;on amp;quot;
photo printing has detectable dots, extra software doesn't work on Macintosh
Soft images, poor shot to shot times, short battery life,
Great feel, extremely easy to use, intuitive, long battery life, lots of options
Not bad for a cheap inkjet
annoying rings and it's flimsy
Inkjet - Cleaning
Inexpensive
Size (small)
Slow and light-sensitive autofocus, no easy way to add filters
Sleek and handsome looks, nicely rubberized, dual back-lighting
Get overall camera
Horrible, bloated print driver for the PC.
easy to use, easy to read display, lots of fun, also an mp3 player
Excellent Picture Quality - Small Size
Nice Design and looks great
size, audio capability, ease of use, design
only 1.3 pixels
Durable, reliable, has the basic features I want,
Spill prone parent's drink holders, in-accessible storage basket when car seat is installed.
Small, Stylish, Wireless Web
Slim, many features for price
price, quality prints
none
Small in size, good optics, nice picture quality.
Significant rebate is about to expire!  Get it now!
So far I haven't found any.
cost of the ink.
Expensive, no bluetooth, paint on the casing not that durable.
price, features
Very good image quality for the money (we received a $100 rebate)
True Multi-tasking marvel. Durable when dropped.  Good display visibility/clarity.  Compact   Convenient.  Keylock minimizes errors.
no color screen, not too many features,(but I am not interested) not made anymore,
Slight Lag Between Pictures and Not Forgiving Of Shaky Hands.
LCD Display,T.V outputs
costly ink cartridges
Only 1.44 MB for storing pictures.
It's basically a disposable camera after 200 shots
Mediocre picture quality
Compact, Good Looks, and Kewl Backlight
Inexpensive, easily hooks up to the television for viewing
Faulty signal issues. Low earpiece volume. Annoying synch issues with Vibrate and Ring.
Good pics,price and easy to use.
everything else
Clean print, easy to use, fits on my desk
Internal memory is small (16), no case or neckstrap, wrist strap feels flimsy
Slow on graphics loaded pages, driver can cause problems
Great OS, gorgeous styling--gets looks everywhere, the price (finally)
Price, output
-Small
A bit noisy, flimsy, sometimes blurry, software average
none
Lightweight, easy to use, inexpensive, great for beginners.
Unavailability of service in areas
Small size, two million pixels o' fun, versatile and weatherproof.
Good for beginners
Awesome design, light weight and thin, feature packed, friendly interface
Model 1800 1.3mp. Nice pics, Sony CCD, amp;#13; amp;#10;USB, Fast SmartMedia change. Battery economy. amp;#13; amp;#10;
Size, features, build quality, picture quality, night shots, and many more to list.
none to date
microprocessor unreliable
Very sensitive microphone; camera dock isn't needed
Battery Life is short!  Sound is mediocre.
Sony's Memory Stick not widely used by other Manufacturers
No viewfinder, No external charger included
Sound Qualtiy, Built in Digital Camera, Expandable Memory, Excellent Contacts Manager
Bulky, no screen protection
Takes a long time to process print
SLOOOOW!
Clunky interface, dim outer screen, no removable memory.
Great camera. Compact.Compatible with high standard flash cards. Great Shooting modes and zoom.
A Reliable printer; Inexpensive
will not take supre fine pictures
Print, scan, and copy all in one machine. Easy to use like a pro.
Had to load the print driver three times before it worked properly.
buying print cartridges (not too often, though)
buttons too small for my small fingers, not intuitive, difficult navigation, confusing menu nesting
nothing
If you can't get consistent sound on a mobile phone, what's the use!!!???
Not as fast as the 800 series HP printers
It lacks the resolution in picture quality of some other well known brands.
no case , i bought my own,
Copier, scanner, printer all in one fairly quiet HP machine
looks cheap
really bad software, bad computer connection
no camera or mp3
excellent quality shots, many on camera options, affordable, low battery consumption, easy to use, Durable
Design, size and weight, user-friendliness of basic functions, large   vibrant screens.
Lightweight, durable and handsome!
Excellent speed, dual cartridges, bottom paper feeder, uses the PhotoRET-II layering technology, and what a price!!
no speaker phone, no vibe+ring, doesn't remember time
Compact unit with lots of features, and good for my work and home use.
No macro mode, no lens cover, poor quality zoom
Great pictures, true color, rugged construction, nice interface.
4 MegaPixels, Small Size, Solid Construction, Good Color Saturation
Clarity of photos, ease of use
poor range; poor workmanship
Compact
Reception, bright screen, EVDO, speaker phone, 1 megapixel camera, battery life, MP3 support
Photo realistic prints, borderless printing, accepts roll paper
good quality and color
Portability, ease of use/download to computer, cheap
This camera is a great high quality camera, takes EXCELLENT pictures
Palm OS integrated, Very large address book, Voice dialing, speakerphone
Price/performance ratio, strong rechargeable battery, optional lenses/filters
size, executive features, great reception ? world traveler.
not-too-good sound quality for roaming calls, small buttons on the dialing pad
Battery life/ flash settings
Many neat accessories that are easy to find and many neat features.
A little pale in the saturation dept. Lens is not that sharp.
The package itself, a little tacky, could look better.
Lots of features, two 65k-displays, design and did I mention features?
small, lots of shooting modes
No USB support whatsoever
Camera has been in the shop three times in the first year.
Easy setup, fast printing, quiet printing, cartridges easy to change
less than crisp images
Easy to use, sleek look
Durability, Lack of Speakerphone, Ringtones, BATTERY!
Looks like a spaceship. Fairly durable. Can't see it unless using a microscope.
Nice, quality camera, very easy to use
Maybe a bit heavy, not very stable on flat surfaces.
none
Too slow, no compatibility with other printer cables, color quality isn't too great
Limited options, flimsy battery door, eats batteries
Cheap
battery life could be longer
Problems with photos surface frequently, camera durability is pretty bad
colour quality, speed
fixed lens, no lcd viewer
Easy to lose because of its small size!
None
battery eater, hooky program
Stylish, sturdy, and an improvement over its predecessor.
superior picture quality, excellent zoom lens, great battery life
Slightly slow menus but even then it makes up for itself
Easy, point and shoot. Great software for transferring from camera to PC via USB.
Many options to suite your needs
Double sided printing, print quality especially on photos, tool-box, ease of use, speed using USB
An extremely durable phone.  I've abused this phone and it still works perfectly.
Quality,Price
print quality, paper tray
Battery life, under-powered flash, no provision for add-on lenses or external flash amp;#13; amp;#10;
Easy to use, Great pictures
Port cover, antenna when extended, takes a bit to find sweet spot.
Expensive ink
Heavy, drains batteries quickly, need additional mem.cards
beautiful print quality, very easy to install and use, good options, no jams
Inexpensive, Mac-friendly
versatility, quality of pictures
Great photo quality, great text quality, very fast worth every cent
Durability, size, zoom, options
Small, fast shutter, lots of great features... did i say small?
small, light, long battery, direct-connect
Convenient, quick, high quality.
Young there is none!
Pricey ink
none
Poor coverage and dropped calls, no solution offered by provider.
Small, Color, Excellent reception, Changable backgrounds, and ringers.  Games. Expensive!!
quality, features, price
BIG color screen, cool games, inside looks cool
Price, reliability, ease of setup
Pictures taken stored on floppy disk
VERY high quality, great compatibility, ease-of-setup, volume capacity, and SPEED
Sad organizer and calendar functions and lackluster phonebook.
Excellent pictures, great software
Picture quality in low light
Bejeweled will crash the phone eventually!
speakerphone button, Verizon customer service.
Rugged. Dependable. Forgiving!
Costs very little; mine was $60 when new 2 years ago!
Great picture quality and depth, produces great printed copies
Poor Indoor Shots, Battery Life
A bit heavy on ink usage plus the ink cartridges are small.
Good reception and call clarity, Speakerphone, 1.3 megapixel camera
easy to use, low price, decent quality
Great features, excellent design, light weight
A bit slow when printing with color
Small and compact, good battery life, durable, voice dialing
Can eat ink cartridges
Color menus, stylish style, size
No web or GSM, no useful keyboard lock, hard to change rings. Antenna can break!
Decent quality, nice for home use as an all-in-one machine
no diopter (wear your glasses), 2x zoom, fully automatic
quality, size, reliability
Price, limited optical zoom, slow shutter recycle rate.
cheap. voice dialing
Small size, lack of external antenna make it easy to fit in a pocket
battery life, solid feel, lit keys, reasonable camera, speakerphone
Noisy; wastes ink when cleaning jets.
Photo quality; Price; Easy to use; Good manual options
no basket, kick the wheels,, hard to fold wearing sandals
Speed
Good Print Quality, Direct Access to photo cards (can use w/o computer)
More expensive than two separate superior items would be.
small, light weight, quick, excellent build quality, takes great pictures, can shoot movie clips
Easy to use; lots of bells/whistles
Good for a short while.
EVERYTHING
Small size
Crash, crash, crash.  drop call, drop call, drop call. Erratic coverage. System bugs
sharp, clear pictures with great color; compact; CompactFlash media
no storage
awesome
A little slow for high-volume printing.
Unbeatable prints
Has all the features, small sleek design, reliable.
Wireless provider will determine your happiness
Very easy setup and installation
A little pricey right now.
The new software upgrade
Went crazy WAY too soon.  All messed up.
Swivel Body - Hologram AF - Fast - Night Framing - Battery Life
Phone has been dropped several times and it still works (in a leather case).
Quickly prints up beautifully crisp color and black and white documents
No Date/Time Stamp Display, Does Noty display Min talked while still talking
Still a little slow printing color.
pretty good value
3.2 MP, Excellent Quality Photos
Limited zoom, special battery
Good features and nice screen.
Simple to use, takes great pictures, uses 3 1/2 amp;quot; floppy disks
Big, expensive cartridges, can't stop a job in the middle of printing.
Print Quality Very Good
LCD display is difficult to view in bright outdoor lighting.
Everything.  Not worth the stamp to mail in the rebate with
Bad reception, and durability overall junk.
light turns off too fast
Garbled, Varying Audio Level, Soft Vibrate
Excellent quality, great photo capability
hard for HP lovers to transition over to
So easy to use, like pie!
Excellent macro function, Excellent camera for the price  amp; features,Build Quality
Excellent images, great battery life, fast zoom lens
resolution is not highest available, but still great
Good reception. Looks pretty.
Dirt builds up on sensor, image buffer too small.
Great form factor, tri-mode, easy-to-use menus, plays MP3s, decent photo quality.
slow printing
everything else
Great SLR like performance and quality without all that film
Excellent call quality, text messaging, perfect size, great battery life.
Small screen, no Polyphonic ringers, antenna is a tad big.
Good pics,easy to use
price
Easy to use, good sound, nice compression feature.
LCD screen auto shut-off, 16MB card, no discount on purchasing card, battery life
not the greatest quality prints.
short talk time
Lightweight, easy to fold, compatible with infant car seat
Mechanical Issues - Color Photos;Poor Customer Service; Spyware; Broken Already
Backlit blue screen, Ease of use, durability
Price, output quality
Print quality, Initial cost, Ease of operation
Some may not like the small flush keys, or cell's small size.
Lightweight, great pictures, easy to learn, add-ons not necessary, genuine SLR look and feel
to much
becoming dated by newer technology
It was free.
Excellent photo quality, reasonably fast printer
inexpensive
none for the money invested
None whatsoever
short battery life, unadjustable shutter speed
White balance when using flash delivers pictures having a bluish cast.
Picture quality isn't that good, cheap design and construction, no flash makes lighting necessary
there are cons?!
Compact, cheap and dependable.
A little slow
Frames per second are a little slower than what it should be!
Style, quality, features, graphics, capabilities, clarity
Got it for a "STEAL", and the quality is fabulous
eats ink very fast
quality photos, quality lens, flash adjustment, nice manual
camera breaks, Agfa does nothing except tell lies
COLORs- short shell life
Good digital pictures that are easy to download through a USB connection.
Sturdy seats may face forward, backward,or toward each other; 5-point harness; easy brake; maneuverability
none
Low price, ease of installation and use, excellent text output and good color output
None
$$$ Price
screen may be slightly small for hardcore Nokia users.
Small, compact, easy to use, ohh and the white lights, they rock...
everything but size and user friendly
memory sticks are expensive
Cheap(ish!), Decent laser printer
Not enough accessories
drivers caused problem with printer port, had to call tech support. But even that was a good experience in the end.
Great battery life
Just remember to recharge the batteries.
zero
Not that hi-tech...
A little big. Battery life. Macro function.
Expensive , expensive additional battery ,  small size Compact flash memory  card
Ink smears,  small ink cartridges, takes up more desk space.
Very light and good reception
light weight, easy to use
Cumbersome menus, drops long calls.
Great features
ringer stinks, charger is terrible, battery life
Only included charger, Vibrate is weak,
High price and limited use with the palm pilot
Optical zoom, battery life, size
Fairly good color printing, multi-function useful
features, rugged, price, quality construction
great idea, easy to fold
Uses floppy disk, battery life, simple to use.
horrible installation
Light, very portable.
Packed with great info and software
roomy, great fabric
Great quality pictures, size, battery life
Lens cap loose, requires lens extension for add ons, view finder poor at night
Skyscrapers cause signal drop-outs.
slow
Lousy screen resolution, not easy to transfer pictures
High reliability and great quality makes it a top choice
pricey
Hidden costs (Battery, Compact flash, Software)
no lens strap, supplied Smartmedia card
LCD screen gets smudgy when you use the view finder, its a battery guzzler.
Terrible reception
None
Sparking little performer; super features
A great Idea
light weight, multi-options, great lens
So small and light- makes difficult to hold on long calls
A little heavy for pocket!
can't program a distinctive ring for different callers
Inexpensive, connection via USB port, works as a webcam
none
Expensive Ink and Paper
OS beyond terrible, its designers should be forced to empty a pool with a sieve.
Quality and Speed
none!
Great camera, Easy to use
Doesn't print too often.
none
earpiece forms to your ear, slim design, clarity, serveral options
poor quality on photo's
Phone, pager, 2way, internet, sms, email all in one. looks neat.
Cheap service
no color screen, on/off button, may be a little too small for some people
Good picture quality amp;#13; amp;#10;size amp;#13; amp;#10;large LCD display
Software is terrible--crashes, locks up computer, hard to use., 8MB is useless.
Easy to download images on any computer.
2.1 megapixels, Movie and Email capability, Links for straight AV/Sound.
There are so many things you can do with this camera, try finding the time.
None
I cant think of one.
Antennae sticks out, looking silly and breakable. Ridiculously expensive!
Ultra Zoom!
very small and light,thumbstick control,backlit keypad, color screen, voice commands
Sleek, Easy to use, Clear blue backlight, and a variety of other features
Excellent photo quality, easy to use, long battery life
Lightweight,Easy to use,Great images
Color Screen, battery life, memory capacity
key pad size.
Battery life, excellent metering system, compact size
Fun while it lasts, until you drop it too many times
Pictures may be on the grainy side if you plan to print them out, due to pixel resolution ~ may want to spend more to get the maxi-pixel sharpness of photos printed out; may grow out of this one and want to buy a more expensive one; limited features
Great camera for Beginner
without a good quality color printer and photo paper, you're stuck viewing photos on the computer
Easy to operate, durable, stylish, good phone for a small price.
Slow response time with menus, reception, symbols rub off
It is analog and has no battery life.
It gets you wanting to use it alot
convenience
Long wait between taking pictures, bad coloring, takes long to download pics
jam problems!
Whiny printing function, consumes ink like an 18 wheeler.
Great printer for the price. Easy set up.
questionable quality, not so great attena
Good quality print jobs.
6 hours to charge the batteries!
none that i noticed
Inexpensive, feature-packed phone. Excellent battery life. Light-weight.
None
Great photo printing, descent text, USB and parallel interface
Address Book
You can't even take all the pictures you want because the batteries are just sucked up.
Cannot be used over a network. Touchy paper feed.  USB ONLY Connector.
some chromatic aberration, focus has trouble in low light, no optical viewfinder
Pricier than lower models
Bulky, heavy, takes up alot of trunk space.
Excellent Print Quality, Improved Print Drivers, USB and parallel ports
Noisy, but not unbearably so
Good resolution, great features, small footprint
Not made for photographs
Heavy when folded, expensive.
A multitude of features, interchangeable colorful face plate options, Dual Band   Great Price
Small, attractive, has good games
battery life, cheesy onscreen graphics
Big drawback is the lack of internet connection.
Cute phone; Thin and lightweight; FaveFive Compatible; Several Features: Camera, Video, Voice Phone Book.
Fast, beautiful prints, Cheap
Speed
Largish body, small LCD panel.
Sucks batteries dry like there's no tomorrow. I recommend rechargeables.
slow to respond
Inexpensive/Sturdy/Reliable/Quality Camera
Great for walking/jogging on all terrains; lightweight; children's weight differences do not throw the stroller off.
Fast and Reliable
Everything
no optical zoom, one star pics come out poorly
Now people can get me, not just my pager!
Slim line battery has a short life #13; #10;
Hi Resolution, low price, great macro
no video clips
Fast, excellent color quality, excellent text printing
No Speakerphone, should be compatible with new Verizon VCAST
Easy to use...many functions at the clik of a finger...
Great Picture Quality, Superb Value, Easy to Use
Cheap.   Can print envelopes without removing paper.
No calendar.
None, yet, except maybe that it isn't free
Ships with small CF card of 32mb.
Clear Pictures - Easy to use
Battery life and screen graphics.
Did I tell you about the floppy disks?
Good quality printing, fast, and efficient
Hard to change resolution.
Nice prints (Especially color pictures)
modules available as money permits, scans, copies, prints color/b amp;amp;w; battery option
Great signal, durable, compact
Old technology.  Obsolete and useless web browser
None so far
Easy to use, images are nice quality
Will need to purchase a cable and eventually black and color ink refills,
Very easy to use. Light weight. Keys are covered.
Photo Quality output, nearly continuous tone, excellent price, great drivers
Downloads   Design!
Ease of use, GUI, look, feel, weight, versatility, cost, Nokia reputation and quality
Looks and feels cheap, talk time less than promised, battery meter is deceptive
Loaded with features,Gud design,Light weight
Poor camera, easy to scratch, ear jack is hard to open.
NONE
A Great all around Product
lightweight, great lighted screen, cool features
battery life is short
Soft photos, proprietary battery with mediocre life.
Small, calendar, exterior screen, one-touch silence, quick/simple volume control, lockable
No optical zoom, slow focus, no good for action flash shots.
Light weight, looks good, reasonable price, good reception
Poor color quality for printing photos, Cheap plastic shell, USB cable not included.
Small, Light, EASY to use, easy to download pictures. Great quality pictures!!
Expensive Cartridge
Lightweight, inexpensive, easy to use
Print the pictures you want. amp;#13; amp;#10;Choose the size. amp;#13; amp;#10;Save pictures to pc from printer. amp;#13; amp;#10;
Having to buy the ink
Doesn't come with cables
Major paper feed problems
Simple Design, Easy Use
Fairly inexpensive, good laser-quality print.
Short battery life, red-eye reduction not very good.
Good printer, copier, and ok scanner, good software with it
Color screen, Dual band, external CID, Voice Dial
Great Size
Thin
No cons to think of.
Good print quality
Decent amount of pixels at a good price.  LOTS of extras.
Tho low price and powerful function
A little slow (faster when printing with a computer)
High resolution, right size, good preview, powerful zoom
pretty
Options galore, adaptable, a "cool" phone
need a printer to get pictures right away
See text below
large size, short battery life.
No built in MP3 support.
Use of color ink seems high.
Phone has excellent reception and good features for the price
X83 is incompatible with Windows Xp and breakdowns average every 3 months.
affordable, easy to use, takes nice pictures
Expensive, battery life
But, doesn't mean you should part with your money.
good looking, ease of use, affordable
Print Quality; Speed; Value
works great, like any digital camera
Camera and video functions
Wonderful color, small size, lots of control.
In-expensive
95 minute talk time, lack of software for color screen
shutter lag, poorly written manual, menus not user friendly
You can delete a picture if you don't like it. No wasted film or waiting for film to be processed.
Excellent ergonomic design,reliable and efficient.
Affordable price,, Light weight,, Good quality of pictures in day-light
Quality, flexibilty and ease of use
Easy to understand interface and nice icons. Lots of functions not found on all cameras
Lightweight and compact.
Dropped calls, Screen size small for Internet
Full featured, has everything and some.
Price.
Price
Fast, inexpensive, easy to use!
Ease of use, portability, quality of pictures
Slower than some, no USB support, 3 colors in one cartridge
Tiny and easy to use
Inexpensive
Antenna, Small Buttons
Size, built, image quality
Very low battery life
Voice quality, Get-It-Now games   tools, sharp looks.
Excellent brand--printing always comes out legible.
CarlZeiss glass lens, 5MP, records to CD-RW, reasonable lag time, large LCD viewfinder
Too little optical zoom
Sluggish firmware (compared to Nokia). #13; #10;Signal reception not better than Nokia. #13; #10;
Cheap
Pokemon shaped, brick, horrible keypad, slow
Great speaker phone, excellent display, friendly, solid functionalilty, wonderful voice features
Ink smears and ink blots
Longer-lasting rechargeable battery, video clips and stills, floppy disks usable with many computers
pricey flash cards
older
Wish it had an integrated lens cap
Not for color printing.
It never makes a blob, is economical to use, the ink lasts long and it hardly ever has paper jams.
Very comfortable to use.
eats AA batteries fast
Slow in colour printing
OCR software is weak, Printing is slow, scan size limitations, no usb cord.
makes a bit of noise, takes time on quality print jobs
No more film to purchase or fees for developing film.
The keypad buttons sometimes don't work when you press them.
Annoying green light in Viewer window.
PRICE, STORAGE, Internet, Call List
ease of use, light weight, portability
Hard to find one negative for the price I paid.
Lens cap not attached.
now seems old technology
Price, Bulky
not the most modern looking phone, no color screen, average battery life
no zoom, poor quality with flash
wish the zoom was better and bettery life could be better
Easy to use.
Serious design defect with battery, too quiet, menus are slow
slow focusing, small displays
Uses lots of ink, paper jams.
colors aren't always perfect, LCD screen can be deceptive, only records a maximum of 60 seconds worth of video
Digital only, bad battery.
Small footprint, easy to use, extremely portable, converts to scanner with scanning cartridge
prints  kinda fast
Wished I had gotten more powerful zoom.
Great color Phone, Great OS, Triband, GPRS, T68i updateable - Picture phonebook, MMS,
Too many features
Constant PAPER JAMS
none so far
Bright light-up display, loads of features, ease of use
Nothing I can think of at the moment.
As with most strollers, it takes up some space in the car
Small, many cover options, text messaging
Battery life; voice clarity; volume
The user menus are not user friendly!  Hard to troubleshoot problems.
price, size / weight, easily "dewed"
A true point and shoot camera.  Great grip.  Exposure modes  amp; "Best Shot".
Cheap and effective
Bulkier than some newer phones
Nice Photo Quality, Fast B amp;W CHEAP
cable is too short.
Easy to learn to use
EVF, Sony Memory Stick proprietary storage media, and ergonomics. amp;#13; amp;#10;
Sacrifices speed for flexibilty
Stylish, sturdy, light, good features.
Made by Motorola.
Slow print time
lots of features
None
Some limitations (like any camera), onscreen menus can be confusing
bad View finder, limited zoom, slow auto focus
Size, features, quality color display, loud speaker phone, accurate voice dial, great look and feel
good
loud
Smooth ride, pneumatic tires, easy to steer, and holds child up to 50 lbs
An overall good company.
Small size, flip phone, Good range of features.
It is phone, if you can get it to work.
ergonomic, easy to use, great lens, decent focus, decent flash support
Irritating the Common Users
not much, batteries drain faster than my v60...b/c of the color LCDs
Good for printing documents up to 30 pages
Garbled, Varying Audio Level, Soft Vibrate
speed and cleaning
It is very comfortable for the child.
Space saving design
lasted 5 months, then broke. total ink HOG!!!
Great pictures, portable
sh_t pictures most of the time, viewfinder not accurate
Good signal, nice display, great performance, feature rich.
No Bluetooth, Bad Signal Strength, Poor Battery Life, No Longer Supported
Fast, Durable, High Quality Printing
That little rubber flap covering the left side
Usage instructions are very clear;  very compact and easy to carry
Plastic Keys, A bit on the bulky side
easy storage, portable, looks
Quality pictures, compact, easy to use
Large  printer.
Cheap, USB connection, reasonable quality photos
Light, easy to steer
Easy to use.
Low price.  Easy to use.  All the basics.  Serial cable makes it compatible with any 32-bit Windows PC
Subpar picture quality but then again, you get what you pay for
camera phone   it was free,
Easy to use, great quality, great value, great flexibility.
Non really.
Can't hear the ringer even on the loudest setting.
Expensive
Eats your battery quickly.
Improved reception, Compact design, Lightweight, 65K color display.
speed, $ for ink refills and price
good  to have a camera with you all the times  able to send photos.
Can't pick up a signal in areas a 5 year old Motorola StarTac will.
red eye with flash
Expensive to replace ink.Ink refill kits sometimes won't work.
Front Paper Tray
small design
Easy to use, cheap price
Price, size, no case included
Slow, high battery consumption rate.
Can't turn off the auto dictionary in messaging.
Ease of use, features, cheap storage
A bit out of date
bad quality photos, no flash, long wait for download
This camera produces some of the best prints Ive seen, great features and solid workmanship
Size doesn't matter, so small and light! Easy to use.
Frequent jams, spots and offset text occasionally
Small design, convenient address book.
Image quality
Bluetooth, Bluetooth, Bluetooth! Appearance and build quality. Voice dial.
Inexpensive, fast printing
Support, quality, reliability
Great Price, Great Photos, Great Features
not so good in dark places
none to speak of
Photo quality amp;#13; amp;#10;Degree of control amp;#13; amp;#10;battery life amp;#13; amp;#10;versatility amp;#13; amp;#10;Range of magnification
Comes with rather small memory card, no rechargeable batteries, and no memory card reader.
Battery Life, durability, stubborn device, slow start up time, LCD is not 1.6!!!
a little expensive, but it's worth it
Reception, unable to be unlocked
Its a huge phone, but it has a fold out keyboard. Can't use standard headset.
Small and thin, color screen, higher speed web, feature-rich
Non-folding, lightweight
easy to use, good pictures, affordable
Audible Quality, NiMH Battery, Button Size/Placement
Small, external caller ID, big screen, stylish
No lens cover, Plastic case, LCD isnt inset
great quality
No frills
weak battery, very strong memory card "eject" mechanism
It doesn't perform like a southern link radio!
Crisp laser; relative ease of use; low cost.
Poor antenna power
Little ringers to choose from. Cannot turn on speaker phone until other party picks up.
Phone volume not so great.Camera definately needs work.More storage space would help.
Fantastic Photo Output, Very Quiet, Nice Software Bundle
Size, Battery Life,
Some closeup pictures have turned out a little too washed out from strong flash
see: #13; #10;http://www.epinions.com/content_48058371716 #13; #10;
Average battery life, a bit bulky, comes with small memory card, expensive accessories
Easy to install; fast printing;  attractive style
shoulder strap was hard to install until I read the instructions
Easy to use combination of car seat and stroller; comfortable for baby.
It has everything!
Large screen
None
It's one device that has a lot of functionality and a good battery life
Everything About The Phone
No optical zoom; poor LCD; battery  amp;quot;hog amp;quot;; barely 1 Megapixel; flash is insufficient indoors
Some limited features
well designed, easy to use
Cheap, good overall quality for the money, small footprint, attractive, usb option built-in
Battery life.. complicated phone book
Inconsistent manufacturing quality.  Product defects are common.
not the fastest
Antenna is flimsy, menus are bulky
Sharp Pictures
- Inexplicable software bugs
2x zoom insufficient at times
Mobile internet could be better
Honestly have not encountered any
Zooms crap, but then if you wanted a zoom you'd have bought the EX-Z3.
Ink(Cost) Not a Fan
might be pricey for some individuals
Little too big for pocket; not cheap.
Office applications, Microsoft Outlook and Lotus Notes Synchronization, and Microsoft Office compatibility.
Picture quality, design, features
Efficient.Fantastic pictures with professional quality!
Small and light weight, good camera, sharp/color screen, tons of features, good joystick
AC adapter extra, serial cable not USB, only 4 F-stop settings:  F2.8, F3.9, F5.6, F7.8
PRODUCT IS DEFECTIVE-FLASH FAILS.  Eats batteries
easy to use, zoom lense, sony makes a good product.
Battery life, reception, perfect size (for me, at least),   rubberized coating for easy grip
excellent image quality, good features, falling price
4 MegaPixel, 3x Zoom, FUNC button, compact size, faster start up!
none I can think of
ClubNokia not available in the USA.
Features, durability, size/weight ratio
Doesn't corner well, no basket.
freezes up sometimes
easy, clear, hi-res, mini-video camera too
Case is less than sturdy,
May not have the sleekest looks.
VERY short battery life, no outside display
The camera can use a litter better resolution
Small, CF card too small, Some Plastic Parts, LCD washes out in bright light.
Not customizable; still has many features.
Sharp clear text and graphics,nice paper tray, good software
Color is used up fast
Flash is too bright on auto setting, but can be adjusted.
printer is kind of bulky
Speed.
Great printer
No RAW/TIFF output, LCD could be a bit better
no self-timer, lens cap or USB connection
life like printing colors
simple, basic, easy to read directions
Only 8Mb Memory Stick supplied
Extremely noisy, poor paper handling, uses ink quickly
Using mobile phone tools, take any song and make it your ring tone.
None!
Easy for beginners to use
lightweight, has a canopy, good support in seat and backrest, easy to maneuver
slow, unresolved design, poor camera, poor viewing outside
none
ISO 50, great images, professional controls, very fast, great build qualities.
fast, appears well built
Media storage is on 8 cm CD's (inexpensive).Hold over 1000 pics! Exceptional pictures
2.0 Mega pixels,LCD screen,great quality photos when not zooming.
none that we've found!
Eye-popping images that can stop a conversation dead in it's tracks!
a inexpensive all-in-one, perfect for small volume, easy software
Awesome Photo Quality, Great Features, Movie Mode, Advanced Camera Features
Price vs. Quality is superior!
easy to use, quality of pictures, battery life
Poor picture quality. No flash. Low aperture. No Zoom...and more.
Ease of Use, Quality, Features
Awesome prints, photo process quality, has color  amp; b/w at the same time.
Extremely short battery life, some connection errors to PC, small CF card included.
not cheap, photo paper expensive
Can't print a 16x20 (hint to Epson)
None so far.
Great Clarity, Phone numbers easy to access, Nice voice command
Big. Takes up alot of space on my desk though.
Dimensions, Features
Bulky out put tray
must purchase vibrating battery separately for $80
Weak flash, limited zoom
Web Enabled
Excellent Colors, Decent Macro Photos, Very Compact and Quick to Launch
pricy
No optical zoom, no sound on video record, flash lag, 8M memory card with purchase..
Great connectivity, easy to sync contacts, great signal strength (AT T Carrier, GSM), great aesthetics!
Beautiful design... rugged... choc-ful-of features...
Hi-res, convenient file transfer, high magnification, great color.
Great quality no-nonsense phone.
Moderately Large for Inkjet Printer
Non-archival, all colors in cartridge
Inexpensive, easy to set up and use, good color and resolution, and voice feedback.
Reception/Quality, Size, and Look
Really good print quality on a starving writer's budget
It looks nice.
A little uncomfortable for long conversations.
Head-turning design, excellent reception and sound quality, tons of features.
Low maintenance, takes a beating, great for a home office
Lost of options for the money.
Great zoom capacity, intuitive menu structure, high quality images, great value
Side camera button....battery life over estimated
small and lightweight. Sturdy and dependable.
Thin, light weight, good reception, clear sound, great speakerphone
WEAK VIBRATE! I can never feel the vibrate on this phone!
place for infant seat, reclining seat, seatbelts in every position
GOOD ECONOMICAL PRINTER FOR SMALL OFFICE OR HOME
free
Batteries die fast
1200x1200 res
price, top feed system
It look cute and is small enough to fit in my purse.
Internal memory is low, no camera bag, LCD
Hard to find in stores and the shoulder straps are a little loose
Best color accuracy and sharpness of all 2.1 mpixel cameras
Price, After Market ink, Speed
Some neutered features, small navigation issues, and poor external display planning.
It does not have a zoom lens
Easy to use and navigate.  This phone is a great asset
Blue bg color, nice compact size.
View window, ease of use, clear pictures, 6x optical zoom
Great quality...
None that I can find.
worst stroller I have ever used
Good print from pictures and documents on your computer
screen goes blank and no support from manufacture
size, low cost, ease of use, peripherals
Haven't found one.
Great features, nice interface, reliable
Read the body of my review
USB problems; unreliable.
Great Price and Good Print Quality
Inadequate operating system to manage memory, freeze ups, power cycling the phone daily
batteries run out quickly
2.1 megapixel, good optics; comes with 8 meg cart
strong, light, easy handling
Great picture...easy to use
Paper jams frequently, color pages are slow and fuzzy
small and has multiple functions with a nice usb connection
Great Service, Excellent Features, Small size,Leaves Very Little to be Desired
Sturdy, nice price, many features, easy manuverability.
A PDA and Phone all in one!
Picture sizes
paper feed
Gets Hot.
best digital camera for the money, fine quality
Antenna Close to Head, Some Problems with Call Quality
Works in Europe
Take over a 100 pics and easy to carry around.
supplied memory stick should be a 16 mb not a 4mb
cost, small basket, sometimes hard to manuever with one hand
High 4 MB resolution, fully dedicated hot shoe, viewfinder versatility, great Canon optics!
Easy to use, quality photos, screen moves.
Inexpensive, very easy to use.
Very easy to use, Great image quality.
Expensive, not as pocket size as PDR-M4
Poor paper handling, jamming
both cameras are bad quality (nothing new for cell phones), Motorola charger, weak vibrate
Software included, print quality, scanner
No included case, movie mode very limited in terms of time.
Print quality of graphics not the brightest
Super-easy to use
Affordable, Fast black printing
Fast, relatively quiet, excellent print output
1. good resolution 2. easy to carry 3. easy storage 4. no complicated software 5. easy to transfer onto the pc
The Camera for the beginners.
easy to use
Stylish, but so are high heels.
Takes great pictures, Takes pictures FAST, AMAZING battery life, and has a great lens!
flash very bright, recommend a few layers of magic tape over it,  expensive and bulky
Nice Pictures, Picture Modes, Self Timer, Great Battery Life
Hard to add ringtones, bulbous antenna. Not much of a PDA.
Excellent print quality.  Great for photos.
Minor things like cheap antenna, average battery life, confusing menu setup and an occasional echo.
Downloading is frustrating, takes really bad pictures with the flash on.
I can get generic cartridges very cheap. Decent quality picture printing.
It folds in half
not really a pocketable camera. Macro capability,Red eye
4 X 6 PICTURES ONLY, VERY EXPENSIVE TO PRINT
One cartridge, rather than dual.
Compact, lightweight, many features
poor closeups, loose lens cap
Shakes a little too much
Takes a few seconds longer than my last four printers to begin printing.
Dual cartridge printer, can use a photo cartridge.
None,so far
Low sound quality, poor reception, confusing menus
Great pictures , lots of options, 10x optical zoom!
Small LCD screen, long time between pictures
n/a
Great price, great quality, fast printer, nice straight-forward design and function
http://www.epinions.com/welcome.html?member=schumanfu2
Nothing good to say at all
Reliable, fast black ink printing
Unable to download wallpaper.
poor battery life
A MACHINE YOU'LL FALL IN LOVE WITH
Can't think of any
no analog mode, weak vibration mode, plastic feel, disabled Bluetooth file transfers, weak camera
Cheaply made, poor quality, serious design flaws which render it unusable.
Small and easy to use
Outstanding Print Quality.
VERY low resolution.  Will not take good enough pics for eBay or email
not real sturdy/no power adapter
low resolution
Non-Color
no flash
Same old tones
Low battery life, no audio for video
Picture quality, ergonomics, construction, controls, two media formats
You have to throw out your old photo processing equipment.
Lots of problems with this printer and it's drivers, Parallel port only, Parallel cord not included, Uses lots of ink quickly
Easy to use, 2" LCD screen, use of Digita scripts, professional image quality, 3x zoom
Looks cool, nice display (when it's working), fairly easy to use
Short Battery Life, Bad sound quality
very affordable
Weak antenna.
Color display, durability, Nokia reputation
battery life is average, short if you have the optional view screen on.
Quiet, compact, ease of use.  amp;#13; amp;#10;
The black ink is an economy cartridge, the double-sided printing module causes the printer to not flush against the wall and takes up more desk top space, the auto align isn't aligned and doing so manually is something I haven't figured yet
Swivel lens, compact size
Efficient and quiet, inexpensive
Very cheap, good quality, long-lasting cartridge
Echoes, lost calls.
clear sharp images
poor paper feeder
Small, easy to use
HURRY OUT AND GRAB THIS OFF EVERY SHELF IN AMERICA,,
Handling can be awkward...offset tripod mount.
size, durability, features, and very user friendly
PHONE SHUTS OFF! Terrible reception, bad side buttons, slow processor.
Great design, Ease of use and bright LCD screen.
features, size
maneuverability, versatility
reception, whats reception. volume needs major improvements. needs to have separate ringer.
Ringer could be louder,flimsy antenna
No soft-power on, single cartridge design
Endless battery life, nice feel, plenty of features and great resolution
WEAK VIBRATE! I can never feel the vibrate on this phone!
Priner cartridges are expensive
Flimsy antenna, somewhat difficult navigation on web and address book
Easy to use, crisp pics
price, easy answer
Con amp;#146;s amp;#9;Digital Zoom is poor and the accessories are expensive. amp;#13; amp;#10; amp;#13; amp;#10;
Terribly slow text output.
Blurry pictures, expensive ad-ons required, in shop 2 times in 1st year
Lightning Fast Speed
Battery Life, Great Phone Reception, Easy to Use
Good features for a low price
Inexpensive (free with service), user friendly, comfortable to use.
Extremly long battery life with the CRV
Battery life, electronic interference
Price, technology, quality
Good quality printing. 2880 resolution prints. Sleek styling.
Only single band. Washed out screen. Reflective chrome around screen. Screen on while charging.
sturdy, sharp bright colors, inexpensive
Speaker phone, camera, FM radio, flashlight, durable
zoom, minor issues with many features
Screen size
Noisy, lengthy time to copy in photo mode. Tends to add too much red.
Highlights "burn out" in bright sunshine.
None found.
Good for home use. Faster than some others
Small, feature packed, intuitive operation
NONE. Brings a tear to my eyes...
uses batteries quickly
Not the lightest camera I own
Lack of accessories, can get hot, keypad lighting(dim   GREEN, bleah), nothing else really!
Incredible lens capable of 10x zoom. Loaded with features.  Sexy design.
Looks, style, feature packed, quad band, changeable faceplates, bluetooth
no Jaguar drivers, can take a few seconds to warm up, terrible support website
GSM only, so limited coverage in the middle of nowhere (currently).  Bluetooth accessories are pricey.
Battery life is drained quickly in cold weather - good thing I'm moving to Florida
difficult to use, high rate plans
Nothing
it wasn't worth that much
Very sturdy, easy to  amp;quot;pilot amp;quot;, comfy
Good quality, Good Price
None
It's the picture quality stupid.
Everything except for the wrist strap...
short battery life
compact, attractive, great reception, easy to use, good battery life
Adaptors needed for different memory cards
Easy to use and yet complete control
Clears desk of both printer and scanner, Copier great for home use,
None I've found.
battery life, sudden phone shutoff, sudden call drops
Sleek design, light weight, affordable, belt clip included, skins included
picture close ups could be better, no thru lens viewing
None
Battery life seems a bit short, soft ringer volume
Rather expensive for the picture resolution.
Good quality print, easy extra features, quiet, cost efficeint, well designed
fragile antenna, that awful low battery signal
bad paper feed, poor print quality
Long Battery Life; Durable; Easy to operate (no flip open to dial or talk)
Compact design (sleek and sexy!), great reception
No Case. Lens is vulnerable to damage.
Great output, economical, solid build quality, good paper handling, easy setup
Great camera, excellent picture quality, and a zoom lense for close ups!
not enough battery life
It's cheap, and it prints envelopes., Rarely jams up.,
Outdated
battery-life; heats up - if that bothers you. rings (if you're not into them)
difficult to install drivers
TAKES BAD PICTURES
Unable to synchronize with palm devices, doesn't work well on ships and boats, style
Expensive ink ($60 for both cartridges), Noisy, Cheap construction, Wastes ink
Lightweight
Small. Awesome battery Life. Really good menu systems.
Sucks every piece of paper at once, crappy Win2k drivers and just all around sucks.
use of floppy disk over memory cards
Outstanding image quality, very easy to use, great software
Battery life, speakerphone, ready-link enabled, comes in 6 colors, fully customizable options, crystal-clear display
Small size, data access and sync software, good battery life, small size
Bad video quality.  Ram overload causing the phone to freeze.
Will not hotsync consistently it loses its usb port assignment upon reboot.
Compact size, lots of features, sleek design
OBEX capable Bluetooth, MP3 ring tones, Speaker phone, texting, Picture and E-mail made easy.
Had to send one back
Great for posed pictures,, Good quality pictures., Quick review time of pictures
Can't print graphics or clipart
It's an HP.  And it's not terribly expensive.
A little big, comes only with NiMH Battery, Not Lithium Ion
Aesthetically-pleasing camera
Calls get cut off, annoying "cannot place call" notice frequently
Bulky, Crappier Than The 8100
Documentation on CDROM, serial port, useless for action photography, high battery drain.
Small size, great feature set for the price.
Just one
No Profiles, RF performance, slow menus.
Good pictures,considering the size and resoloution
Easy, disks are cheap or free, fun!
Store 1000 names on the phone...Its light to carry around....
None that I have found
GSM network not built up yet
2.5hr talking battery life, unable to resize text on main screen, small memory, camera resolution
Lightweight, good battery, easy to use
BIG,HEAVY,NO SHADE, IMPOSSIBLE TO DRIVE
Viewfinder; well designed
It's bigger than the small cell phones today.
cuts off
painfully  unreliable
- none
or you can say there's nothing good about it.
Excellent Photo Quality, Low Cost
spotty coverage, not cool looking, hard to program
I sold it again on Ebay.
Ease of use, Sturdy Design
loaded with features, individual ink cartridges, high quality/speed
High price, Cheap phone
not many accessories
video has no audio, slow, no auto lens cover, loud, better choices available
Tech support is superb - but you'll pay for the call
The instruction manual is a little vague in some sections.
Clarity and Sound
Inexpensive and worked great for a year
Phonebook not alphabetized by the phone itself, Manual is a bit hard to understand
Easy to use. Software is simple, uncomplicated
Like I said before .. It prints great
None
Canopy is limited, "Child tray" is flimsy, Heavy (21 lbs), Seat adjuster is not great
I have never had a paper jam or any problems with it.
no optical zoom, no sound with the mpeg files
good quality
Nice screen, good volume and clarity.
none
Maybe too much of everything
eats up batteries like they're going out of style, not much space
Replacement ink cartridges
Easy to use interface, easy to hook up to your computer and upload pictures,
Looks cool, nice menu system, great color screen.
Fast,quality prints b amp;w prints at a good price.
Menus are very well designed, speakerphone, great color screen, small, durable.
It receives far too much flak from people
None
odd shape and size of phone
Auto white balance is off much of the time when shooting indoors.  Lame software program.
large and long, like pumping iron to steer the thing with a kid on board
High quality printouts, beautiful graphics, Quiet operation, Easy to set up.
Fantastic balance of portability, photo quality, battery life and capacity (with 256 MB SD card)
Fast, very high resolution
Inexpensive
Easy to use
Expensive
Screws up computers, doesn't have a good quality picture
Very nice camera for the price. Easy to use, nice quality pictures
Lag from when you press the button.
short battery life, but quickly recharges
Great feel, size, weight
Great images, feature rich
Antenna, small buttons
Very fast text printing.
Archival printing, photographic quality, excellent color fidelity, included roll paper handling, quiet, easy setup, warranty
heavy and bulky, a nuisance to carry around on vacation secondary to its size and weight
none
Short battery life, LCD screen hard to read outside
VERY pricey ink cartridges; initially comes only with a color ink cartridge.
Great Digital Camera For All
will jam incredibly after a period of time
Head cleaning is loud and slow, USB operation can be unreliable.
It will handle most small office needs
Lacks a zoom lens.
too light
Cannot use flash when recording videos.
everything else
Easy to use.  Light.  Uses only 2 AA batteries
Swivel LCD, flash options, great images
Easy to use.
QUALITY construction, COMPACT, OUTSTANDING PHONEBOOK..  User Friendly PERIOD
wimpy flash; slow, dark lens
Size, Small, Good/Okay egronomics, easy use controls, available memory cards.
Great battery life, ease of use, Picture Quality
bad price
small and cheap
Compact, durable, inexpensive, easy to change faceplates and downloadable ring tones.
sucky games
Excellent Photo Printing
Big color screen, size, flip phone, speaker feature, and color pad.
A Starter Camera with a Great Finish!
cost
Small
2-megapixel, no Windows XP support, short battery-life, pokey connection, 8MB-CompactFlash, no image-editing software, no motion-capture.
great print quality
Features, battery life
Leather case has to be removed for base charger use.
great pics , great speed
weak flash, slow lenses
Easy controls, durable build
Easy to use, practical, "cool"
Reception, excellent infrared synchronization, noise filtering, battery life, operating (menu) system.
Sleek, simple, quick, quiet
Hassle getting into and out of trunk
Extremely compact, feature packed, intuitive design, tough as nails #9;
Stub attenna doesn't get as good reception as regular attenna.  Battery use annoying sometimes.
light, compact, good features, usually strong signal and large calling radius.
Loads of features; easy enough for point-and-shoot use; customizable My Modes and shortcuts; bright LCD.
lightweight; compact
Small.  Cool swivel lens.
does not hold a lot of paper
Very low speaker volume and proprietary Operating System
Ultra cool, good resolution, excellent image quality, highly portable, uses AAA batteries
None
No printer sharing ability.  Usable on one computer only. Poor support.
-Camera phone
Nice picture quality
Battery life
Noise level, envelopes jam when printing
Slightly cumbersome
BEST cellular phone I've owned.  Takes a beating and continues to perform.
Fast and high quality text, easy network connection
expensive cartrages
Compact, lightweight, maneuverable, economical
but it won't work at all on my system
Easy to use, durable, great reception, great price, Many accessories
None that I can find....
Simple, lifelike
slow color printing, runs out of ink quickly
Low price, Decent output
The speed of printing isn't quite as fast as stated in the company literature. The automatic reverse side printing operation is not explained very well in the manual in regards to the adjustments that have to be made in the word processing software. The ty
Phone has gloss-like finishing which shows fingerprints very easily.  The touch screen is sensitive.
battery life in my area, poor coverage
Price/Performance, typical HP quality
Feature rich with superb battery life, but weaknesses overshadow strengths significantly.
Mine is under the Vivitar brand name ,but the same camera !
Cheap
expensive, 2.1 megapixels
It is lightweight.
no zoom
Fast Printing, inexpensive
Easy to install, clear prints
Watch that battery strength if you use Bluetooth.
The inks are expensive as is the high gloss, good paper.
Sony has a HIT - Compact, Zeiss Lens, Long-Life Battery, Adjustable Optical ViewFinder
well if it weren't a lemon... voice activation, display clarity, ringtone selection
The 460/490 were among the first point and shoot digicams to impress professional photographers.
Great pictures.  Fast,quiet printer. Easy setup.
Small, very fashionable phone
Size.
Compact, many features, ease of use
Power drains in use even when plugged into car or AC adapter.
none that I can think of for this pric
Bad design, slow response time, bad reception. Not worth the pain.
NONE
convenient, one hand fold, lightweight
Dual band, very small, lots of third-party accessories
No sound on movies, :30 limit on movies
real music ringers, mp3 player capability, big screen
Can't find any yet
Has a camera
Organized Picture Taking Made Easy
great quality
No Optical Zoom, No USB
Inexpensive
quit working, poor quality pictures
Ease of handling and high resolution
Great price for features
Digital Zoom distorts quality
Haven't found any cons at all.
Short battery life, only comes with 8MB Card
Printing Speed, Print Quality, Reliable paper feed mechanism
Low battery life, sub par software
Reception, voice clarity, size and it just plain looks good!
Lightweight for running,durable and great on trails.
Read my opinion
Very light and narrow.  Extremely easy to get through narrow aisles.
Good quality.
Great Camera
Small footprint; Easy paper loading
Hard to open one handed, calendar isn't large memory-wise.
No zoom, slow upload time, poor picture quality in less than bright natural lighting conditions.
Weird form, Pricey, Camera needs work
A little bulky. Screen graphics geared to toward the "youth" market.
expensive cartridges, poor support lines, durability.
Lots of features, camera, very small size.
great quality, nice printing abilities
Nice features
Battery Time, Phone Heats Up, Reception in certain areas
Size is a little big.
Great Quality Printer
